Bishop Williamson delves into Apocalypse chapters 10 and 11, discussing St. John's 
divine instruction, the critical need for preachers to understand Scripture, 
and the prophecies concerning the end times.

# Apocalypse 10 & 11: Angel, Book and Two Witnesses

Bishop Williamson explains that Apocalypse Chapter 10, concerning the angel and the 
little book, signifies Christ making the Old Testament clear and calling St. 
John—as a figure for future preachers, especially those in the time of the 
Antichrist—to deeply understand and internalize Scripture. 

This understanding is sweet to the higher nature but bitter to the lower, 
imposing a penance. Williamson critiques modern exegesis, referencing Ratzinger's 
interpretation of Trent on Scripture and Tradition, which he argues erroneously 
leads back to *sola scriptura*. 

He then introduces Apocalypse Chapter 11, detailing St. John's instruction to 
measure the temple (the Church and Christ's humanity) with discretion, and 
discusses the coming of the two witnesses, likely Enoch and Elias, as a divine 
help during the final tribulations.

## Apocalypse Chapter 10: The Angel and the Little Book

(Transcript starts): The Old Testament prophets were made clear by the coming of
Christ. This is not the Second Coming, but a vision of Christ coming, a vision of
the angel, which is Christ intervening. "And I heard a voice from heaven saying to
me, 'Seal up the things which the seven thunders have spoken and write them not.'"
John grasps the full sense of the Old Testament, but the moment had not come in his
time to lay it out. The doctors of the third age of the Church will do that. "The
angel whom I saw standing upon the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to
heaven." Our Lord pointing all men towards heaven. "And he swore by him that liveth
forever and ever, who created heaven and the things which are therein, and the
earth and the things which are in it, and the sea and the things which are in it,
that time should be no longer." Our Lord is declaring with a solemn oath by Himself
that the world will come to an end, and there will come a moment when there is no
more time. Human history is not open-ended, going on forever. "But in the days of
the voice of the seventh angel, when he should begin to sound the trumpet, the
mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared by his servants, the
prophets."

When the preachers of the age of the Antichrist are heard, "in the days of the
voice of the seventh angel, when he should begin to sound the trumpet"—the seventh
trumpet being the half hour after the Antichrist—then God's judgment will be made
manifest, as prophesied down the ages. "The mystery of God should be finished, as
He has declared by His servants, the prophets." Now, the seventh trumpet is the end
of the world. The world will come to an end, and there will be a general judgment.
"The mystery of God should be finished." The history of man will be finished, and
all mysteries, or a great deal of them, will be revealed in the general judgment.

### John Commanded to Take the Book

Verse eight: "And I heard a voice from heaven again, speaking to me and saying,
'Go and take the book that is opened from the hand of the angel who standeth upon
the sea and upon the earth.'" Go and receive the book. The voice from heaven tells
John, as a figure of preachers needing above all a deep knowledge of Scripture, to
go and get an understanding of Scripture from our Lord. From the hand of the angel
who stands upon the sea and upon the earth, from our Lord.

John himself personally does not need this. Why not? Because the apostles
themselves were all inspired with a complete understanding of Scripture at
Pentecost or around that time. Consider Luke 24:45, an important verse: Our Lord
said to them, "These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you,
that all things must needs be fulfilled, which are written in the law of Moses, and
in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me.' Then he opened their
understanding, that they might understand the scriptures." So that is the apostles
being given the understanding of the Old Testament. In the Apocalypse here, it may
also include the Epistles of Saint Paul because they are quite tough.

Therefore, John here is a figure of the preachers. It is not John himself needing
to grasp Scripture, for he already does. If John is told here by the voice from
heaven to go and take the book, he stands in for preachers who need, above all, a
deep knowledge of Scripture. The preachers needing a deep knowledge of Scripture
are figured here by John. John is told to go and get from the angel, which is
Christ, the book; to get a complete understanding of Scripture.

### The Exegetical Crisis and Sola Scriptura

"And I went to the angel," verse nine, "saying unto him that he should give me the
book. And he said to me, 'Take the book and eat it up, and it shall make thy belly
bitter, but in thy mouth it shall be sweet as honey.'" The preacher must leave all
in order to go to Christ. "I went forth to the angel saying to him that he should
give me the book." "Give me the book" means that John, on behalf of the preachers,
begged for a deep knowledge of Scripture.

I have recently been reading Cardinal Ratzinger's little book somewhat attentively,
as I am due to speak on it. It is clear that at the time of Vatican II, everything
came back to exegesis. There is a German exegete or theologian named Geiselman who,
in the 1950s, studied Trent. He found that on the crucial question of the sources
of revelation—the Church classically teaches that there are two equal sources of
revelation, Tradition and Scripture—Trent's first draft said something like, "All
revelation is found partly in Scripture and partly in Tradition." Trent canceled
that and stated, "All revelation is found in Scripture and Tradition."

Geiselman argued that if Trent did away with "partly, partly," it is because Trent
thought that revelation is wholly in Scripture and wholly in Tradition. If it is
not "partly, partly," then it is "wholly and wholly." So, it is totally in
Scripture and totally in Tradition. If it is totally in Scripture, then there can
be no revelation outside of Scripture. And therefore, we are right back with
Luther's *sola scriptura*. Then, at the foot of the page, Ratzinger has the nerve
to say how far we are from Luther's *sola scriptura*. I do not know how he does it,
but he does.

Therefore, all revelation is in Scripture, therefore exegesis is king. And
Ratzinger says that from that moment onwards, the exegetes ruled the roost with
just this little argument. The catchword was, "How stupid can people get?" This
applies to these intellectuals leading and misleading the Church. Geiselman's trick
phrase, as translated in Ratzinger's book, the buzzword on everyone's lips, was
apparently "material completeness," meaning the material completeness of
revelation is in Scripture. Not the formal completeness, but the material
completeness. So it is all there in Scripture somehow or other. That is how the
modernist exegetes became king. So again, it is Scripture; it is the
falsification of Scripture. The right understanding of Scripture is very
important. I have read somewhere that in the end times there is going to be a new
grasp of Scripture, which seems very possible.

### The Sweetness and Bitterness of God's Word

John here is begging on behalf of the preachers for a deep, true knowledge of
Scripture. "Give me the book." "He said to me, 'Take the book and eat it.'" Devour
it: study, learn, meditate. Devour the book equals study, learn, and meditate
Scripture. "And it will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be as
sweet as honey."

The stomach represents the lower part of human nature, for which the Word of God is
a constant penance—a pain in the belly, *dolor in ventre*. Quoting Jeremiah 4:19:
"My bowels, my bowels are in pain. The senses of my heart are troubled within me.
I will not hold my peace, for my soul hath heard the sound of the trumpet, the cry
of battle." Destruction upon destruction is cried, for all the land is laid waste.
Suddenly are my tents spoiled, my pavilions in a moment. Cardinal Innocentius said
Jeremiah is our prophet. A well-said opinion. He is a prophet for our time because
he lived through the terrible corruption at the end of the First Temple, just
before Nebuchadnezzar came with the Babylonians. The glory of the temple had
departed. Ezekiel saw the glory, the Shekinah, departing from the First Temple (cf.
Ezekiel 10:18, 11:23). The glory of the Lord came upon the temple when it was
dedicated by Solomon (cf. II Chronicles 7:1-3), with fire coming down and the
majesty of the Lord filling the house. The departing glory signified the temple
was being abandoned and the Babylonians would destroy it. So Jeremiah 4:19 refers
to this agony.

"And he will make thy stomach bitter, but in thy mouth it will be like sweet
honey." The mouth is the higher part of human nature, for which God's word is a
continual sweet refreshment. Psalm 118 (119 in Hebrew) verse 103: "How sweet are
thy words to my palate! More than honey to my mouth. By thy commandments I have had
understanding: therefore have I hated every way of iniquity." So, the stomach
stands for the lower part of human nature for which the Word of God is a constant
penance. The mouth is the higher part of human nature for which God's word is a
continual sweet refreshment.

"And I took the book from the hand of the angel, and ate it up: and it was in my
mouth, sweet as honey: and when I had eaten it, my belly was made bitter."

### John's Renewed Mission

Verse 11: "And he said to me: 'Thou must prophesy again to many nations, and
peoples, and tongues, and kings.'" After John devoured Scripture, he would want to
go to heaven. When he has understood the fullness of God's truth, all he wants is
to join God. But the angel says to him, because as John's higher nature is sweetly
nourished, his lower nature is more disgusted than ever. All he wants is to quit
this life. But the angel tells him, "You must go to prophesy again to the nations
and peoples and tongues and many kings."

The angel is saying to him that after the island of Patmos, he must return to
Ephesus. John is presently on the island of Patmos in exile. The angel is telling
him he will have to go back to Ephesus once more to feed his flock. He must feed
his flock and write his Gospel, which is not yet written, for all future countries,
generations, kings, tribes, and nations.

After chapter 9, the assault by the powers of evil upon the Church under the reign
of the Antichrist, the author now shows the help that God provides to His servants
against these formidable events. On the one hand, a special help from the Son of
God and the renewed preaching of the Gospel in chapter 10. On the other hand, the
intervention of two mysterious witnesses who are going to strengthen the faithful
of Christ in the last days, and whose mission is described in chapter 11.

This chapter we have seen, Chapter 10, is a vision of a renewal of the Gospel. The
vision takes the form of John himself asking for a grasp of Scripture. But as being
part of the sixth trumpet, it is a special grasp of Scripture for the preachers at
the time of the Antichrist, before the general judgment. The seventh trumpet will
be immediately after the general judgment. So the first help is a renewal of the
Gospel. The second help, Chapter 11, is the two witnesses.

## Clarifications on Apocalypse Chapter 10

In verse 4 of Chapter 10, John, on Patmos, wants to write down everything being
revealed to him about Scripture. He is told not to write it down because the time
had not yet come for that knowledge to be made available. In the latter part of
Chapter 10, John is a figure for the preachers at the time of the Antichrist who
will need a special grasp of Scripture. They will be given special help. At the
end of the chapter, it returns to John personally. When John, standing in for the
preachers of the Antichrist's time, is shown the real content of Scripture, he
wants to go to heaven. The angel must then remind him of his earthly mission to
return to Ephesus. John, in these visions, is somewhat above time, moving in and
out of his own era. Some verses apply to his time, others to the end of the world.

It is not an easy book. This commentary [being used by Bishop Williamson] has the
advantage that it does not try to apply the Apocalypse to specific historical
situations, remaining general, except concerning the ages of the Church, which I
think is accurate. It focuses on patterns of events, which are more important than
particular events. People often err when trying to apply it to specific events. For
example, some commentaries, like one reportedly by Father Kramer saying the United
States will keep the faith, are unreliable, as the United States as a nation has
never had the faith. This commentary stays at the level of patterns, which is
good.

The seventh angel mentioned in verse 7, "in the days of the voice of the seventh
angel," is the seventh trumpet, which is detailed in chapter 11, verse 15: "And
the seventh angel sounded the trumpet: and there were great voices in heaven,
saying: The kingdom of this world is become our Lord's and his Christ's." This is
the period of preachers immediately after the Antichrist, just before the return of
Our Lord, a period of about 45 days, if we read Daniel correctly.

## Apocalypse Chapter 11: The Two Witnesses and Measuring the Temple

Chapter 11 details another special help from God at the time of the Antichrist. We
are still in the sixth trumpet, the time of the preachers of the Antichrist.
Chapter 9 described the locusts, a figure of specially harmful and hypocritical
heretics attacking the Church before the Antichrist—our situation today. Chapter
10 showed the renewal of the Gospel. Now, we see the return of the two witnesses.
This will likely have a particular application at the time of the Antichrist.

Most commentators think the two witnesses will be Enoch and Elias, come back upon
Earth. Elias left the earth in a chariot of fire and, as far as any human saw,
never died. Some Church Fathers think both he and Enoch (who also was thought not
to have died) will return. Elias will preach to the Jews under the Antichrist;
Enoch, a Gentile, will preach to the Gentiles. Scripture verses suggest Enoch also
did not die. It is thought they are somewhere on earth writing the true history of
the world, which is quite different from what we are given to read.

Early Christians may have thought the two witnesses were coming soon, as many
expected the end of the world relatively quickly. Saint Paul in Thessalonians
warns against thinking the end is imminent. Few thought it would last 2,000 years.
Gregory the Great, around 600 AD, thought the world was in a terrible state and
laid the foundations for the Middle Ages, perhaps not expecting the world to last
much longer.

### Measuring the Temple

Chapter 11, verse 1: "And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and it was
said to me: Arise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that
adore therein. But the court which is without the temple, cast out, and measure it
not: because it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy city they shall tread
under foot two and forty months."
"And I will give unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two
hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloth. These are the two olive trees and the two
candlesticks that stand before the Lord of the earth."

For writing his Gospel, John will receive special lights, including a rod of
discretion, or a yardstick. A reed of discretion to know how to convey the Word of
God to various classes of men. It is a reed like unto a rod. A reed is supple,
while a rod signifies strictness and governance. This suggests a new kind of
Christian government, more merciful and understanding. Supple as a reed, but like
a scepter for governing oneself and others.

"Arise and measure the temple of God." "Arise" means get up and practice yourself
what you preach. "Measure the temple of God, and the altar, and those adoring in
it." "Measure the temple" refers to the Church. Take the measure of the Church as
being made for men and not for angels. Get the measurements of the Church right.
John is going to write his fourth Gospel not for angels, but for men. The Catholic
Church is for men, not angels.

The chapter division between 10 and 11 seems misleading, as the content flows
directly; the angel is still instructing John. "And the altar": the altar is the
humanity of Christ, or the human nature of Christ, meek and humble of heart. "And
those adoring therein": the adorers are men, as being fallible, weak, and
infinitely diverse. Take the correct measure of the Church, take the correct
measure of the humanity of Christ, and take the correct measure of men: weak,
fallible, and infinitely varied.

Verse 2: "But the court which is without the temple, cast out, and measure it not:
because it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy city they shall tread under
foot two and forty months." The outer court represents the hardened sinners and
heretics outside the Church, who do not belong to the Church. "Cast out" means
excommunicate them. Do not take their measure, and do not heed their false
pleading.

We will carry on tomorrow.

```
{
    "date": "14-12-1998"
}
```