Bishop Williamson delves into the imagery of the elect in heaven, the significance
of the seven seals, and the divine commission to preach, drawing parallels to the
Church's contemporary struggles.

# Apocalypse 7 - 8: Saints, Seals, Call to Preach

Bishop Williamson explains Apocalypse Chapter 7, detailing the vision of the elect
in heaven, their white robes signifying purity achieved through works and washed
in the blood of the Lamb. He describes the seven features of God's glory and
praise, and identifies the elder as representing Catholic tradition. Bishop
Williamson says the great tribulation is the series of trials every just soul
undergoes. 

He emphasizes the importance of mourning for the state of the world
and the Church, contrasting it with modern complacency. He then interprets the
seventh seal in Apocalypse Chapter 8 as a period of silence after the Antichrist,
possibly 45 days as suggested by Daniel. Finally, Bishop Williamson introduces
the seven trumpets as a call to preach, underscoring the necessity of a
canonical mission from the Church and discussing the historical context of
Archbishop Lefebvre's actions and the Vatican's response.

## The Multitude of the Elect (Apocalypse 7:9-12)

We did not get very far last Thursday, but we will move today.

Apocalypse Chapter 7, verse 9: "I saw a great crowd whom nobody could count,
from all tribes and nations and peoples and tongues." Our Lord remakes the unity
of mankind in the Catholic Church. "Standing in front of the throne." Standing,
in other words, not fallen like the damned. Amos Chapter 8, verse 14. I will
actually find the quote. Amos 8:14: "They that swear by the sin of Samaria and
say, 'Thy god, O Dan, liveth, and the way of Beersheba liveth,' and they shall
fall and shall rise no more." So these are standing because they are not fallen
like the damned. "In the sight of the Lamb, clothed in white robes." In the sight
of the Lamb, the eternal joy, the especial joy of beholding Jesus' humanity.
Saint Theresa of Avila once had a vision of one of Our Lord's hands, and she was
in ecstasy for a quarter of an hour. The especial joy of beholding Our Lord in
His humanity, Our Lord's humanity, which will be in heaven. Clothed in white
robes. The white robes represent the purity of soul of the elect, of the saved.
"Palms in their hands." Palms mean victory. In their hand, by their works. They
have conquered by their works. Palms in their hands: they are victorious by their
works. They are pure of soul and victorious by their works.

"And they cried out"—_Clamabant_. "They kept on crying out." It is not
_clamaverunt_, but _clamabant_, the imperfect. They were crying out. "They kept
on crying out with a great voice saying, 'Salvation to our God, who sits upon the
throne, and to the Lamb.'" "And all of the angels stood in a circle around the
throne." "All of the angels stood around about the throne, and the ancients and
the four living creatures, and they fell down before the throne upon their faces
and adored God." The angels plus the elders plus the animals equals one single
church. "And they fell down in the sight of the throne on their faces and adored
God, saying, 'Amen.'"

Verse 11 still: "The angels rejoice without jealousy in the salvation of men."
Rejoicing in the salvation of men. "Saying, 'Amen.'" Remember Luke 15:32, there
will be more rejoicing in heaven over the conversion of one sinner than over the
righteousness of 99 righteous. "Blessing, and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving,
honor and power and strength, to our God forever and ever. Amen."

Notice we have got this here of the glory and praise of God: blessing, glory,
wisdom, thanksgiving, honor, power, and strength. Seven features of the glory and
praise of God. In other words, the universality of the glory and praise of God.
Seven is the number for completion. Six is the number for incompletion, for
imperfection. Seven is the number for perfection. So we have got seven features
here of the glory and praise of God signifying the completeness. That wraps it
all up. What are these seven features? _Benedictio_, their own beatitude, because
God does not have to receive any blessing. Splendor, knowledge, gratitude, honor
in heaven. Number five is honor in heaven. Strength and fortitude to God are...
to our God, forever and ever, amen.

## The Elder Explains: The Great Tribulation and Purity (Apocalypse 7:13-14)

And one of the elders replied and said to me... One elder, the one elder of verse
13, represents Catholic tradition. Catholics are meant to ask tradition what the
visions of scripture mean. Catholic tradition is the safest guide. And one
representative of tradition is enough. You do not need more, unless you have to
make sure what tradition really is, but one representative of tradition is enough.
That is why it is "one of the elders said to me." He explains, "Those who are
dressed in white albs, these that are clothed in white robes, who are they and
whence came they?" And I said to him, "My lord, thou knowest." And he said to me,
"These are they who come out of the great tribulation."

So the elder asks him the question, asks John the question. John says, "Well, you
tell me and we will both know." And the elder then replies. So the elder tells
him, "Who are they and where have they come from?" Verse 14: "My lord, thou
knowest." And he said to me, "These are they who came from the great tribulation."
In other words, the great tribulation is what made these saints what they are.
They came from the great tribulation; the great tribulation made these saints
what they are. What is the great tribulation? The great tribulation is the
collection of trials by the world, the flesh, and the devil, the series of trials
by the world, the flesh, and the devil which any just soul must undergo in this
life. "They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb."

In the blood of the Lamb, not their own blood, because we are talking about all
of the saints and not just the martyrs. In the blood of the Lamb, of course, by
the grace of Our Lord Jesus Christ, flowing from the passion, through the
sacraments, and through the Church, to all souls, especially the souls of the
saved. So it is the blood of the Lamb and not their own blood because we are
talking here about all the saints and not just the martyrs. So they have washed
their garments in the sacraments of the dead, in baptism and confession, actually
in all of the sacraments; particularly washed in the sacraments of baptism and
confession. And they have whitened their vestments by their good works. So, it
says, "These are they who have come out of great tribulation and have washed
their robes and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb." So, they washed
in confession and penance. They have whitened their vestments by good works,
always through grace, coming from the passion of Our Lord. They whitened their
vestments in the blood of the Lamb.

## The Reward of the Saints (Apocalypse 7:15-17)

Verse 15: "Therefore they are before the throne of God, and they serve him day
and night in his temple, and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell over them."
Hence, because of their cleansed and whitened garments, hence they partake in the
unceasing liturgy of heaven. They are in front of the throne of God and they
serve Him day and night in His temple, and He who sits on the throne will dwell
above them. They partake in the unceasing liturgy of heaven because they have
washed and whitened their vestments.

Verse 16: "They shall no more hunger nor thirst, neither shall the sun fall on
them, nor any heat." Here you would say there will not be any more Minnesota
winters. But then, the Book of the Apocalypse was not written in the state of
Minnesota, so he talked about heat rather than about the cold. They will not
hunger nor thirst anymore. No hunger, they will have super-substantial bread
(Matthew 6:11). There will be no hunger because they will have super-substantial
bread. They will not thirst because they will be awash to the eternal life.
John Chapter 7, Verse 37: "And Jesus stood and cried, saying, 'If any man
thirst, let him come to me and drink. He that believeth in me, as the scripture
saith, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.'" John 7:37-38. They
will not thirst. The sun will not strike; there will be no persecution to strike
them, or misfortune. They will not hunger. They will not thirst. They will not
catch the sun. Sun here means persecution or misfortune.

Verse 17: "Because the Lamb, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne
shall rule them and shall lead them to the fountains of the waters of life and God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes." Jesus Himself will lead the saved
souls to partake of God's own wisdom, power, and goodness. Jesus Himself will
lead these saved souls to partake of God's own wisdom, power, and goodness.
Darkness is _fuori posto_, out of place. Compare Isaiah 12:3: "You shall draw
waters with joy out of the Savior's fountains." Who wrote the encyclical
*Haurietis Aquas*? And what was it about? Pius XII. That is right. *Haurietis*,
"You shall draw waters," that is Isaiah 12:3. "You shall draw waters with joy out
of the Savior's fountains." Jesus Himself will lead them to partake of God's own
wisdom, power, and goodness. The Lamb will rule them and will lead them to the
fountains of the waters of life. And God will wipe away every tear from their
eyes. Compare Matthew 5:5, "Blessed are those who mourn."

## The Importance of Mourning

Dr. White said something very interesting when he was in New York giving a lecture
on C.S. Lewis. How many of you know approximately who C.S. Lewis was? He was an
English Anglican who wrote all kinds of books: theology for everyman, science
fiction novels—science fiction of a rather better kind, not technological, but
futuristic. Is that fair? I have read very little C.S. Lewis myself. In any case,
novels. What else? He wrote poems, I think. Anybody? Criticism also? Yes, I think
that is right. He was a don at Oxford, I think, or Cambridge. Did he finish his
days at Cambridge? I cannot remember. He never converted to the Catholic Church,
but he is a good apologist. He is very smart. Not smart enough to become
Catholic, but he was smart; he certainly defended Christianity, and quite
successfully. Someone, a doctorate, says a number of his books are quite useful
to be able to put into the hands of people who are beginning to make their way
towards the faith. So he certainly argues well, and a lot of his quotes, if you
come across them here and there, are good quotes. He certainly sees how crazy the
modern world is and so on, but he never really tied it all up and drew the right
conclusion. Never drew the complete conclusion. So it is a good start and a
rather less than good finish.

C.S. Lewis is quite a favorite of certainly Anglicans, I think, or
Episcopalians, and of sort of civilized people who are sympathetic with Christian
civilization. That is the kind of people that like him. And there is a C.S. Lewis
group in New York which invited Dr. White to give a lecture on him. This was a
week or two ago. He was there and he gave his talk. As he came away, he said—it
was maybe three or four weeks ago—but anyway, he was mulling over afterwards what
was wrong, what was wrong with these people. They are civilized people. They are
decent. They are open to religion. They like C.S. Lewis. They liked my
conference. What is wrong? And he said, finally he honestly came up with: they do
not mourn. They are not mourning. They are comfortable people. They have got
nice, comfy lives. They have got themselves adjusted to religion. Religion is
good. Civilization is nice. I have got a nice job. I have probably got a nice
family. I have probably got a nice house. They are not mourning. And there is a
problem if they are not mourning.

On the other hand, you take some of these little old ladies who can hardly put one
thought behind another, but who pray the rosary all day long and who are
brokenhearted over the state of the church. How many of you know such little old
ladies? Yes, well, they are the salt of the earth, and you know, "Blessed are
they that mourn." That is it. And unblessed are they that do not mourn. Actually
in Luke, chapter 6— cursed are you that laugh and rejoice. Find that quote. Luke
6:20. "Blessed are the poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that
hunger now. Blessed are ye that weep now. Blessed are ye when men shall hate
you." That is four blessings. Verse 24: "Woe to you that are rich." Woe, 25: "Woe
to you that are filled." Twenty-five and a half: "Woe to you that now laugh." Oh,
dear. What about the smiley, smiley partners? "Woe to you that now laugh, for you
shall mourn and weep. Woe to you when men shall bless you." There you are, see.
So there are four blessed and four woes in Luke. And woe to you that now laugh,
for you shall mourn and weep.

That is not the way the world goes. The modern world, every time anybody gets
anywhere near you with a camera, you have got to crack out in the most ginormous
smile, as though everything is absolutely wonderful and happy and great, and you
have got every brand of toothpaste in the calendar to advertise. And that is
compulsory, and you are not allowed to look like anything other than stupendously
and irreversibly and ineluctably, blessedly happy. Well, that is not the way Our
Lord thinks. "Blessed are they that mourn." So every time a camera comes near you
from now on, you look glum and mourning and you start weeping, all right?

Therefore during this life, blessed are they that mourn (Matthew 5:5). All the
saints weep for various reasons, because this world is out of joint. "The world
is out of joint. Oh, cursed spite that ever I was born to set it right." Fox?
Holden? Audience guess? Hamlet, yes, it is Hamlet. The world is out of joint in
one way or another, and the saints realize it, and they do not pretend it away
like the smiley, smiley people. The smiley, smiley people, "How are you?" "Great."
"Did not your grandmother die just yesterday?" "Oh, I am great. I am feeling
great. Wonderful." "But I thought your son just committed suicide." "Oh, I am
feeling great." So, the saints mourn. The smiley, smiley people refuse to mourn.
So blessed are those who mourn. All the saints have some kind of tears. The
Archbishop, you could often hear the tears. You could hear them in his sermon. He
did not cry, but his voice would crack sometimes as he began talking about the
Church. As he would talk about the Church, you could hear his voice cracking. He
never broke out in tears, but he was crying internally; it was obvious he was
crying. So, the saints mourn. All of those tears will be wiped away in heaven. All
of those tears of compassion, suffering, and compunction will become sources of
eternal joy in beatitude. All of those various kinds of tears of the saints will
become sources of eternal joy.

## The Seventh Seal: Silence in Heaven (Apocalypse 8:1)

Chapter 8, verse 1 will bring to an end the seven seals. In fact, the seventh
seal is just the one verse of chapter 8. "And when he had opened the seventh
seal, there was a silence in heaven as if for half an hour." The silence... it was
a silence in heaven as it were for half an hour. I do not know why this verse got
attached to chapter 8. The obvious thing would have been to split chapter 7 and
chapter 8 after verse one, but there you are. This verse, chapter 8:1, the
seventh seal, is the state of the church after the Antichrist. Remember, the
sixth seal was the persecution of the Antichrist, and then the elect. The
persecution of the Antichrist was the end of chapter 6. Cast your minds back to
chapter 6:12: "And I saw when he had opened the sixth seal, behold, there was a
great earthquake. The sun was darkened. The moon became completely like blood. The
stars fell down from heaven like a fig tree dropping great figs when it is shaken
in a big, big wind, and the heavens rolled up like a scroll, and every mountain
and all the islands were shifted from their place. And the kings of the earth, and
the princes, and the tribunes, and the rich, and the strong, and every servant,
and every rich man hid away in caves and in the rocks of the mountains. And they
told the mountains and the rocks, 'Fall down upon us and hide us from the face of
he who sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.' Because the great
day of their anger has come, and who shall be able to stand?" That was chapter
six, the Antichrist, the gigantic persecution at the end of the world.

So the seventh seal is the period after the Antichrist. According to Daniel 12,
verse 12, this half hour is more or less 45 days. So this verse suggests that
after the Antichrist will die, between the death of the Antichrist and the end of
the world, there may be a quiet period of 45 days. That is what Daniel suggests.
Daniel 12, verse 12, let me read it to you. "Blessed is he that waiteth and
cometh unto 1,335 days." "Many shall be chosen and made white and shall be tried
as fire and the wicked shall deal wickedly and none of the wicked shall
understand but the learned shall understand. And from the time when the continual
sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination unto desolation shall be set
up, there should be 1,290 days." That is the reign of the Antichrist, three and a
half years. "Blessed is he that waiteth and cometh unto 1,335 days." That is
another 45 days, and that period looks like it is the period after the
Antichrist. Mysterious, but that is what the Church Fathers think. Half an hour
standing for 45 days.

## Recapitulation of the Seven Seals

Any question on the seven seals? That is pretty tough. Let me just remind you, the
first four seals were the four horsemen of the Apocalypse. White: the church
going forth to conquer. Red: blood, the church being persecuted, the second age
of the church. Black: heresy, the third age of the church. Yellow: hypocrisy,
false Christians, not any particular age of the church. The fifth seal was the
call of the saints, the church suffering down the ages. The sixth seal was the
Antichrist with the signing of the elect, and you have just had the portrait of
the elect. And the seventh seal there is the 45-day, it looks like, period of
peace or quiet after the Antichrist, before the end of the world. Any questions
on the seven seals? Yes.

(Audience member): What was the reference again?

Daniel 12, verse 12. If we finish the Apocalypse, which we may well do before the
end of the school year, we might have a look at Daniel because Daniel and the
Apocalypse kind of sort of go together. We could also look at the Catholic
epistles, of course.

## The Seven Trumpets: A Call to Preach (Apocalypse 8:2-6)

We move on to the seven trumpets. Chapter 8, verse 2, to chapter 11. Now, we are
getting into it. Cardinal Ratzinger said the third secret of Fatima is the
Apocalypse, chapters 8 to 13. I think Cardinal Ratzinger said this. Twelve is of
course the dragon and the woman, that is a very famous vision. Thirteen, the two
beasts, that is another famous vision. Eight, nine, ten, eleven, the seven
trumpets. Seven generations of the church. You have got an introduction, which is
the beginning of chapter 8. We then got again a group of four and a group of
three. Four trumpets until the end of chapter 8. Five, six, and seven are the
last three trumpets, chapters 9, 10, and 11. The first half of chapter 9 is the
fifth trumpet, six goes from halfway through 9 to halfway through 11, and the
seventh trumpet is the last part of chapter 11. The last three trumpets are also
the three woes, W-O-E-S.

All right, let us have a look at chapter 8. "And I saw seven angels standing in
the sight of God, and they were given to them seven trumpets. And another angel
came and stood before the altar, having a golden thurible, and there was given
to him a great deal of incense in order that he should offer of the prayers of
all of the saints upon the golden altar, which is before the throne of God. And
the smoke of the incense of the prayers of the saints ascended up before God from
the hand of the angel. And the angel took the censer and filled it with fire of
the altar and cast it on the earth, and there were thunders and voices and
lightnings and a great earthquake. And the seven angels who had the seven trumpets
prepared themselves to sound the trumpet." That is all of the introduction, and
verse seven is the first of the seven trumpets. This introduction: what is a
trumpet? A trumpet is preaching. An instrument of war calling Christians to
combat and announcing the victories of Christ. "Who shall give battle if the
trumpet give an uncertain sound?" That is in Paul, 1 Corinthians, I think. So
there is an example of trumpet being the blast of Christian truth being preached.
So trumpet is preaching, an instrument of war calling Christians to combat and
announcing the victories of Christ. Seven, the figure seven stands for the
conversion of men by the seven-fold Holy Ghost. As the trumpets are going to
sound the truth and doctrine of Christ, and with the seven gifts of the Holy
Ghost, this is going to convert men.

## The Necessity of a Canonical Mission

They were given to them seven trumpets. "Given," meaning no one can take upon
himself to preach. What is the word for that in the Church? Mission is right,
yes. Canonical mission, that is right. You used to need in the Church, when the
Church is in Her right mode of operation, both sacramental ordination and
canonical mission, and the two things are different. Ordination did not give
jurisdiction. Ordination was one thing, jurisdiction another. The same with a
bishop. A bishop may be sacramentally consecrated, but jurisdiction is another
thing. And the Archbishop made it very clear back in 1988 that the bishops he was
consecrating would have the sacramental consecration, but not any kind of
jurisdiction. The Archbishop was absolutely not pretending to give them any kind
of jurisdiction. What would he have been doing if he had been pretending to give
them jurisdiction? Setting up a separate church. Yes, setting up a separate
church, making a separate church, and he said, "That is absolutely not what I am
doing."

Therefore, where does the jurisdiction of such bishops, such priests, Society
bishops, Society priests come from? Because it is not coming from the Pope.
(Audience member): It's a necessity.

Yes, if you like. It comes from the Church. The Church is supplying. And in what
way does the Church supply? How do you know that there is a necessity? Obviously,
the whole crazy situation, but who, so to speak, puts in the hands of these
priests their jurisdiction?

(Audience member): The faithful come to them with their concerns.

That is it. The faithful, so to speak, as the faithful come towards one of these
priests, he triggers the Church supplying jurisdiction. The faithful cannot bring
the jurisdiction, and the priest cannot give himself the jurisdiction, but the
Church gives the jurisdiction, which is triggered as the faithful come to the
priests. So that if nobody came towards us, we would be without jurisdiction. We
do not have any from the official Church, that is clear, from the official
members of the official hierarchy. Those have not given us any jurisdiction. But
they did at the beginning, of course, and that, again, is a very important point.
And the Archbishop always insisted greatly upon that, that the Society and the
seminary in Switzerland were lawfully founded before... they were completely
lawfully founded, and therefore there was a canonical mission and jurisdiction
from the Church before the wildcat suspension of 1975. And then the wildcat, et
cetera, and then Rome just built... the suspension of 1976 was rested upon...
his suspension, _suspensio a divinis_, the Archbishop was in 1976 when he
ordained, in the end of June in 1976, he was strictly, apparently, struck with
the Church punishment of suspension. The justification for that suspension was
the fact that he had disregarded the dissolution of the Society in 1975. The
justification for the dissolution of the Society in 1975 was dot, dot, dot.
Michael Davies is arguing it right here in the book we are listening to.

## The Dishonesty of Modern Churchmen

So, Rome built one... Rome, the foundation stone for Rome's series of injustices
was the dissolution of 1975, and the dissolution of 1975 was unjustified because
the society enjoyed de facto Pontifical right so that the diocesan bishop no
longer had the ability, according to law, to dissolve it. But then as that
Cambridge review man was quite right to say, Rome played footsie. Rome pretended,
Rome shifted off the responsibility, pushed onto Bishop Mamie the responsibility
of dissolving the society. And then Rome turns around and says, "Well, it is a
Pontifical act." It was, I mean, skullduggery, dishonesty of the highest degree.
Wretched, absolutely wretched. For instance, in 1975, I remember, the Archbishop
was down for that meeting with the three cardinals: Cardinal Wright, Cardinal
Garrone, and Cardinal Tabera. 

And he said beforehand, "Can I bring somebody with me?" "No." "Can I bring a 
tape recorder?" "No." "Will there be a recording of what is said?" "Yes." 
"May I afterwards pick up a tape recording of what is said?" "Yes." So 
afterwards he says, "Well, now may I have a tape recording?"
"Come back tomorrow." He comes back tomorrow, "May I now have the tape recording
you promised me yesterday?" "No, you may not." "May I have an account of what was
said?" "Come back—" Then he says, "Then I gave up. I just gave up," he says. With
people like that, ugh, it is trash. That is what is in the white trash, those
churchmen. And it is much more serious to find that in the Vatican than it is to
find it in the White House. Oof. So, white trash. That is what they are.

How can they reach that point? What is the psychological, moral, theological
explanation of men at the heights of the Church behaving so dishonestly?

(Audience member): I think they're just stuck in the horizontal level of
personalities and pride.

Personalities and pride, yes. They got stuck on the personal level.

(Audience member): Lack of faith.

Yes. Yes. That is really what it is, it is a lack of faith. They are manipulating
the bureaucratic machinery of the Vatican just like it is any bureaucratic
machinery, with this difference that when churchmen do it, when churchmen descend
to doing that, they do it much worse than anybody. The Archbishop said, "Those
churchmen have treated me worse than Russian Communists would have done." That is
true. They are blind. They cannot see what they are doing. Their blindness is a
punishment. It is a terrible thing. God help us. If you or I go that way, we
should be just as bad if not even worse because of the graces that we have
received. But they are blind. They cannot see what they are doing. The end
justifies the means. They have got into, without realizing it, and I am sure they
would deny it if you said that, that they are into the end justifies the means.
And you see the whole bureaucratic machine... they, of course, they know all of
the tricks. The Vatican has been in business for 2,000 years so they have got
some experience. They have got a long experience. They know all of the tricks.
They know how to manipulate and maneuver and if they once become dishonest, then,
you know, there is no limit to what they will get up to. It is tragic, really. It
really is tragic.

So, how did we get onto the Vatican?

(Audience member): The commission.

(Audience member): Given.

Ah, yes. That is it. The commission. And therefore, here it is. They were given
to these angels seven trumpets. In the Catholic Church, you have to be given a
mission, and the mission that you are given is very important. If you are given a
mission, then you can be sure that the Church is behind you. So the Archbishop,
I repeat, it was very important that official Church approval of the foundation
of the Society way back in 1970 by Bishop Charrière was very important to him
because that was, for the Archbishop, the sureness that what he was doing was of
the Church and that it had the Church behind it. If he had not had that, then it
would have been a wildcat seminary and a wildcat society and all the rest, but it
was not. It was only wildcat condemned.

```
{
    "date": "30-11-1998"
}
```