Bishop Williamson decodes Revelation 16, linking the seven vials of God's wrath 
to the seven capital sins and modern societal corruption, while showing "The 
Protocols of the Elders of Zion" as the hidden agenda shaping global events.

# Apocalypse 16: The Great City and Hail


Bishop Williamson explains that Revelation 16:19, where "the great city was split 
into three parts," signifies mankind divided into just men, repentant sinners, and 
obstinate sinners. 

He asserts that contemporary men are so corrupt they will react to 
divine punishment with defiance, believing they have rectified God's perceived 
"delinquency." Bishop Williamson discusses "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion," 
a blueprint for 20th-century events designed to degrade Gentile 
governments before a new, infallible global authority takes over. 

He interprets the seven vials of Revelation 16 as divine punishments for the seven 
capital sins: greed, lust, anger, pride, envy, avarice, and sloth, detailing how 
each sin manifests and is addressed by its corresponding vial.

## Introduction

Alright, chapter 16, verse 19. The lightning, the voices, the
thunder, and the earthquake. Verse 19: "And the great city was split into three
parts. And the cities of the Gentiles fell, and Babylon the Great came into mind
before God to give to it the chalice of the wine of the indignation of His wrath."
That's four genitives one after another: *Vini indignationis irae ejus*.
"And every island fled and the mountains were not to be found. And a great hail
like a talent came down from heaven upon men and they blasphemed God, and men
blasphemed God on account of the hail, the plague of hail, because it was very
vehemently great."

The city, verse 19, is divided into just men, repentant sinners, and obstinate
sinners. Mankind is divided into just men, repentant sinners, and obstinate
sinners. And the cities of the Gentiles fell; all human institutions. The cities
of the Gentiles are all human institutions. The cities are the nations, all human
institutions.

Verse 20: "And every island fled and the mountains were not to be found." We
remember that we're talking about the general judgment, the end of the world in the
general judgment. "Every island fled" means men resisting the all-around corruption
escaped punishment. Those men were like islands amidst the sea of corruption. Those
who do not go under, the islands that do not go under, the men who do not go under
in the all-around corruption, escape punishment. "And the mountains were not to be
found." The mountains are the saints towering in virtue, like a mountain, are not
engulfed in the disaster. The saints towering in virtue are not engulfed in the
disaster.

"And hail great as a talent descended from heaven upon men." Hail is punishment
with hailstones tailor-made for each sin. The hail is a punishment with hailstones
tailor-made for each sin; a divine punishment with hailstones custom-built for
each sin. And that is a punishment as vehement as the pains of hell.

## Modern Man's Defiance and the Illusion of Democracy

And men blasphemed. I've often said, you must have heard me often say about the
present situation, men are so corrupt today that if God, quote unquote, dares to
punish them, they're going to shake their fists in His nose and they're going to
say, "Who do you think you are to be punishing me? How dare you? Who do you take
yourself to be, almighty God?" That's how people are going to react. They are so
filled with their own rights, with human dignity, with the glory of mankind, with
the delinquency of God. "God's got it all wrong. We human beings have done our best
to set it right. And now you, God, are stepping in to dare to say that we've got it
wrong? And you're daring to re-establish your wrongful reign?" That's how people
are going to react.

Apparently, all the ministers of religion that have tried to go to see Clinton to
get him to admit that he's done something wrongâ€”he's done nothing wrong. Nobody can
persuade him any differently. The man is absolutely twisted. And of course, he's
not the worst. He's basically only a puppet. The real delinquents are the ones
pulling the wires behind the scenes, but they're hidden from the views of the
people because otherwise the people would realize that it's not a democracy at all.
The people at the moment are given the illusion that they are in a democracy,
therefore they are sovereign. They're not sovereign at all. They're simply led by
the nose by hidden masters instead of being led out in the open by open masters.
But that's the punishment for turning away from God.

## The Protocols of the Elders of Zion: A Blueprint for Chaos

The Protocols say, "We're going to inject liberalism into the bloodstream of the
Gentile nations until they don't know what they're doing, until they don't know
where to turn, until they go crazy." We injected liberalism into their bloodstream,
and they are now going crazy. And when they're crazy enough, when the craziness is
complete, we are going to take over. They will come to us to beg us to take over.
And after we have made a complete monkey and complete idiot of their governments
and of their governors... Exactly what's happened now, exactly what's happened just
in Washington with all of this idiocy, criminal idiocy. They've made a complete
monkey... The Gentiles have made a complete monkey of themselves. "Then our
government will take over, and in our government there's going to be no arguing
and no mistakes, and nobody will be allowed to raise a little finger of protest.
Our government's going to be completely different. But you'll see in the media,
when the time comes, the media will have everybody's minds so inside out and back
to front that everybody will think this is better than democracy." Yeah, just wait
and see. People are so stupid and so blind when they turn away from God. That's it.
God says, "That's the way you wanted it? That's the way you'll have it. What you
wanted will be your punishment. You chose it, that's what you got."

How many of you have read The Protocols of the Elders of Zion? Not nearly enough of
you. You should all, you ought all to read The Protocols of the Elders of Zion
because it's the blueprint for the 20th century. It's the way the 20th century
works. "We're going to take over their clergy. We will make a monkey of their
church and of their clergymen. We will fill the people with sports and with
spectacles so that they can't think of anything else. We will destroy their
politics. We will make idiots of their politicians." And what else? Exactly what
you see happening today.

## The Significance and Disputed Authenticity of The Protocols

In several countries now, simply to own a copy of The Protocols has been a capital
offense. You could have your head cut off or you could get electrocuted or whatever
it was if you owned a copy of The Protocols. But of course, The Protocols is bogus.
But if you own a copy... So it was in communist Russia. So it's been elsewhere. But
The Protocols is serious. Dead serious. But of course, we-know-who immediately
stirred up an enormous controversy about it, just in typical style, claiming it's a
forgery. And of course, all the media backed the idea that it's a forgery. But
Henry Ford, who's an American, had his head screwed on in many ways; he simply
said, "I don't know whether it's a forgery. All I know is that it's exactly what's
happening all around us." Which is a very common-sense answer. But of course, all
the media constantly screamed that it's a forgery. Everybody assumes it's a
forgery. So that way they try to discredit it. But it's exactly what's happened
ever since.

The Zionists were holding a meeting in Basel in Switzerland in, I think, 1897, or a
little before that. And I think the Russian secret police got wind of it, because
the Jews had the knifing for Russia, because Russia was one of the... It was still a
semi-Christian autocracy. There was a single leader, the Czar, and he governed in
the name of Orthodoxy. It still was, to some extent, a Christian country, and the
Russians had the number of the Jews. Therefore, the Jews were determined to destroy
Russia, and therefore the Czar's secret police was still defending themselves
against the Jews. I think the story is that while these Red Sea pedestrians were
all gathered in this hotel room, somebody who was as smart as they are cried out,
"Fire! Fire!" So all of this vermin immediately began scuttling out of the room as
fast as they could because they were all scared of their skins, and they left
behind papers on their desks. So then somebody went in and picked up the papers.
And that's, I think, how originally... That's one story of how originally they got
hold of the papers of The Protocols. That's one story.

## The Satanic Brilliance and Implementation of The Protocols

The document stands by itself. It seems to take the form of a speech. It's some
Zionist explaining to the others, a very, very limited and very secret group, the
game plan, the blueprint for how we're going to take control from the dumb
(Hebrew). And it's a brilliant plan. It's satanic. It's satanic in its brilliance,
because it just knows human nature inside out. And it knows the faults and the
weaknesses of the Gentiles. And it says how we are going to move in with our
messiah. We will be the messiah, and we will save the world. We will dominate the
world and we will save the world. And all the nations will bow down in front of us,
and will adore us, and will be thankful to us. And nobody will be allowed to raise
a finger against us. Our government will be infallible. We will not make any of the
mistakes that the (Hebrew) are always making. And we are the ones that are
responsible for having made such a monkey of the (Hebrew)'s governments.

I mean, can you imagine that this spectacle that there's been in Washington for the
last few months is exactly The Protocols? Exactly. Everybody's discredited. The
senators are discredited, the president is discredited, party politics are
discredited, the media are discredited. The whole thing is completely degraded and
degrading. And nobody can have anything except disgust for the whole shooting
match. A plague on all your houses. That's it. And they've done the same to...
they're doing and done... A few more times and the American public will be ripe
because the American public believe in their Congress. They believe in their
Senate. They believe in their Constitution. They believe in their wonderful
Washington. "Well," says the Lord God, "you believed in a constitution without me,
you believed in a government without me, you believed in your senators without me.
Look where it gets you."

## God's Permissive Will and the Role of "Hidden Masters"

That's to say that the Lord God is allowing the Red Sea Pedestrians to do all this.
It's so foolish to say He knows what He's doing, but it's a human way of speaking.
He knows even more what He's doing than the Red Sea Pedestrians know what they're
doing, because they're simply tools of the Lord God. They don't know it, and if
they thought... that's the last thing they'd want to be if they thought about it.
The last thing we want to do is further the cause of God. But there you are.

Where is that piece of paper? Jenkins, you know. This time it's behind the desk. The
bookshelf behind the desk. No. It's a black binder, in the middle of the bottom
shelf behind the desk. Okay? Facing that way. No, it's a black binder with my notes
in it. It props up the shelf so you have to lift the shelf to get it out. It's
(Hebrew), a kind of two or three-page summary of some of the most telling extracts
from The Protocols. I think I have it in that binder. I'm not sure.

## Call to Understand The Protocols and The Antichrist's Agents

But you all ought to know The Protocols because it's absolutely our world. And I've
said to you so many, many, many, many times, it's not in order that we all become
raving anti-Semites, though will you. But it's so that you know, so that you once
and for all give up this idea that everybody's sweet, everybody's nice, there
aren't any villains, nobody's plotting or planning the criminal idiocy that's
going on today. It's well-plotted and well-planned and well-designed. And only
liberals can think that it's by accident or it's not really as bad as it looks, or
just give us a little more enlightenment and progress, and it'll all sort itself
out. So and so and so... no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No.

And the only people that can understand the agents of the Antichrist are people who
understand Christ, because if you don't take Christ seriously, you can't take the
Antichrist seriously. If you don't take the Antichrist seriously, you can't
understand what's going on, because these people are agents of the Antichrist.
They know what they're doing, and they want to get rid of every last trace of
Christ. It's Satan. It's simply Satan.

Yes, that's it. It may or may not be in here. I may be lucky. It may be here, I
can't remember. Thanks. I can't remember where I keep it. It may not be here. It's
just a one or two-page summary. I'm afraid it's not here, in which case I don't
know where it is. I'll have to find it for tomorrow. I have to look for it
tomorrow. Is there, are there other copies in the bookstore of The Protocols? There
are copies, yeah. Buy it while you still can because as soon as they come to power,
it will be forbidden, absolutely forbidden. No, I don't know where it is. It's not
in here. All right. I'll look for it for tomorrow.

## Return to Apocalypse: The Seven Vials of Wrath (Revelation Chapter 16)

All right. Back to the Apocalypse. The Synagogue of Satan, he spoke about it in
chapter... The Book of the Apocalypse spoke about it in chapter two. The Synagogue
of Satan is a phrase. Chapter two, verse nine: "Thou art blasphemed by those who
call themselves Jews and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan." That's obviously
racial Jews, but they're not children of Abraham. They're not true, they're not
spiritual children of Abraham. They're fleshly children of Abraham, but not
spiritual children of Abraham. "Fear nothing of whatever you're about to suffer.
Behold, the devil is about to send someone from amongst you to prison in order for
you to be tried, and you will have tribulation for 10 days. Be faithful even to
death. I will give you the crown of life."

So, turn back to the beginning of chapter 16, and we go through. Those are, we've
seen all seven vials, so this is seven all in one chapter. The seven seals were
spread over three or four chapters, the seven trumpets over three or four chapters,
but the seven vials are all in this one chapter. Right. The seven cups.

### The Moral Sense: Punishment of the Seven Capital Sins

There is a moral sense of the same chapter. It's the punishment of the seven
capital sins. The moral sense of chapter 16 is the punishment of the seven capital
sins. Who remembers the acronym for the seven capital sins? SEALGAP. Sloth, Envy,
Avarice, Lust, Gluttony (Greed in transcript, but typically G is Gluttony, Avarice
is Greed for money), Anger, Pride. Otherwise, I couldn't remember. Don't know about
you, but once I've got an acronym, I can get it. So it seals the gap of my memory.
How's that? Pretty good, yeah? I didn't think of SEALGAP. One of you thought of it.
I don't know who it was, but it's good.

### First Vial: Greed (Verse 2)

All right. Verse one, we start again. "And I heard a great voice from the temple
calling out to the seven angels, 'Go pour out the seven vials of the wrath of God
upon the Earth.'" And then verse two, "The preachers are angels as having to guard
souls against the evils that threaten them." So the angels here are preachers who
have to warn, go and tell the preachers to warn people against the seven vices.

The first vice. "And the first went away and poured out his vial upon the Earth,
and there was a savage wound and a terrible wound upon men who had the character of
the beast and upon those who adored his image." The first vice is greed. The Earth,
he poured out his vial upon the Earth. The Earth represents men insatiably greedy,
with the character of beasts, adoring their belly. Greed. Men who have the
character of beasts adoring their belly. The wound is hunger inflicted in hell.

### Second Vial: Lust (Verse 3)

The second, verse three: "The second angel poured out his vial upon the sea and
there was blood as of a dead man, and every living soul died in the sea." The
second vice is lust, which is a tumultuous bitter sea, a tumultuous salt sea. The
second vice, verse three, on which the preacher pours out his preaching, is lust. A
tumultuous bitter sea. Blood as of a dead man is the quasi-incurable wound of lust.
Proverbs 23:27: "For a harlot is a deep ditch and a strange woman is a narrow pit."
"My son, give me thy heart and let thine eyes keep my ways for a harlot is a deep
ditch and a strange woman is a narrow pit."

### Third Vial: Anger (Verses 4-7)

Verse four. "And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and upon the
fountain heads, and there came blood. And I heard an angel of the waters saying,
'Thou art just, oh Lord, who art and who wast holy, who has judged thus because
they have poured out the blood of the saints and the prophets and thou hast given
them blood to drink for they are worthy.' And I heard another from the altar
saying, 'Even thus, Lord God Almighty, true and just are their judgments.'"

Verse four. The third capital sin dealt with here is anger. These springs are
anger brooding; rivers are the anger exploding. Anger brews until it explodes; the
fountainhead turns into a river. Anger. The angel of the waters in verse five and
then the other angel, verse seven, are the Old Testament and the New Testament
which both tell that anger is punished. Anger is punishable, it is a vice. The Old
Testament and the New Testament both tell that anger is a punishable vice.
Obviously, there's such a thing as righteous anger if it's under the control of
reason and it's in the right time and the right place, like our Lord angry with
these sellers in the temple. But anger blackens the soul, like bitterness. It
churns around like a poison and turns into hatred.

The archbishop used to say that in his experience in Africa, before Christianity
would reach, before the Catholic Church would reach a village, "Don't have any
notion of the noble savage and the wonderful, sweet Africans before the Catholic
faith reached them." He says, "They're full of sins." And he didn't mention the
most obvious sin that you'd think of, but he mentioned the sin of anger and hatred.
Everybody, he said, in those villages hated somebody. It was full of dissension
and bitterness and anger and hatred. That's it. It was true. I remember in the
lives of the saints, you see how many of those Italian saints especially are
credited in their hagiographies for having appeased dissension, having quietened
down arguments.

### The False "Love" and Underlying Hatred in Modern Society

The anger and hatred is not so obvious today. Why not? How do you spell love? L-U-V.
Everybody is love, love, love. L-U-V, L-U-V, L-U-V. But just one shake of the test
tube and all of that L-U-V, L-U-V, L-U-V is all ready to turn into... hatred. It is.
Examples anybody?
(Audience: Inaudible response suggesting everyone loves one another.)
Yes. That is to say? Everyone loves one another.
(Audience: Inaudible)
Yes. That's an example. This love is false. It's a false charity. And it's all
ready to turn into hatred. You see it... But then, you know, you just sort of
smooth down its feathers again and you say one or two nice cooing things, and it
turns back into love, love, love. But love, love, love and a pretty nasty hatred
are like absolutely heads and tails. The one will flip straight into the other and
back again. Any other examples, anybody?
(Audience: Inaudible)
Yes. The love, love, love society has produced a very bitter youth, it's true.
Absolutely true. The youth are very bitter. Deep down bitter. It comes through in
their music. Listen to rock. Not for the delight, but for the instruction, as Dr.
White would say. It's very instructive listening to rock. I think so, anyway.
(Audience - Jenkins: Inaudible)
Yes. That's another perfect example. Yes. And then, of course, abortion. The
liberals' hands drip with blood. It's all love, love, love, love, love, but then
on Saturday morning, my little sweet thing will go down to the abattoir with my
encouragement, if not with my orders, in order to slaughter the little thing inside
her womb. It's a very ugly thing, love, love, love. It's very false.

And you'll see, if the food trucks, if the welfare stamps, if the food no longer
arrives in today's big cities, how is the anger... well, the Rodney King incident
caused riots, didn't he? How was that quietened down? Tons and tons of federal aid.
There you are. Tons of federal aid. Solve the problem with money. In fact, for the
Blacks, it's obviously well worth having a riot, because you've got everything
built up new afterwards for nothing. The government will come and build it all up
again for nothing. It's just like Jewish lightning. You could call it Black
lightning.

### Historical Parallels: Slavery and "Birth of a Nation"

(Audience - Jenkins: Inaudible response about behavior on plantations)
Yes. You would never have had the Blacks on the plantations behaving quite like
that. I'm sure the Blacks on the plantations occasionally went mad, I'm not an
expert in this either, but not mad like in the big cities in the North, because
they were never treated down South on the plantations like they're treated by the
liberals in the North. The liberals in the North, of course, think that they love,
love, love the Blacks. But, you know, it's bogus. It's completely bogus. Whereas
the plantation owner, who did care for his slaves... The slaves knew that the
plantation owner was a human being and the plantation owner knew that the slaves
were human beings. It was actually a more humane system than the liberalism in the
North, believe it or not.

That comes out in a very famous American film, anybody? Which all of you ought to
watch. It's a film you ought to watch: *Birth of a Nation* by D.W. Griffith. *Birth
of a Nation*. It's a silent movie, and it's all about a Northern boy and girl and a
Southern girl and boy before the Civil War. I think they know one another. And then
the war breaks out, and then they all have to fight. But then after the war, I
think they get together again, and the film is how the war was caused by
liberalism. It was won by the liberals with disastrous consequences in the South,
as a just reaction to which you had the... stop your innocent young ears, Ku Klux
Klan. Oh. That tells you how interesting the film is. Imagine a film praising the
Ku Klux Klan as a just self-defense against the carpetbaggers, the out-of-control
Blacks, and worse, the carpetbagging scum from the North who came down to exploit
the situation in the South. Not that the South are angels, please. Not that the Ku
Klux Klan are angels, please. All of these poor Protestants fighting one another,
killing one another, blinding one another, with no idea where the real answer is.
Just one set of mad Protestants against another, except one is slightly less mad
than the other. The liberal Protestants are even worse than the non-liberal
Protestants. But the whole thing, Protestantism against liberalism, they've got no
idea. But still, D.W. Griffith was an honorable man, and has made an honorable
film. And the solution is that after the war, North and South get together again,
and we give birth to... The United States of America. That's the solution. And the
Northern boy marries the Southern girl and the Southern boy marries the Northern
girl, and the United States lives happily ever after. That's it. That's the
solution if you haven't got a real grasp on the problem. And of course, it was the
solution that all these dear Protestants... It was the best that all of the dear
Protestants could manage, and it created this Protestant nation. The Civil War from
1861 to 1865 forged the modern United States of America. No question about it.

It's interesting to read Joe Sobran on the question of Abraham Lincoln. Joe Sobran
is no admirer of Abraham Lincoln. Abraham Lincoln made federal government take a
huge step forward. He's not such a hero as the liberals make out. So again, he's
solving problems... It's always that story. If that presents a problem, you don't
solve the problem by going upwards. You go forwards downwards again, and you just
keep on going downwards. You refuse to go back towards the Catholic faith. Now
that answer is out. And yet, it's the only possible answer.

### The Catholic Approach to Social Ills

How does the Catholic Church deal with slavery? Does it start a revolution? What
does it do? What does it tell the slave owners and what does it tell the slaves?
It's in scripture, we've seen it. We've seen it in the Civil War. Yes? That the
slaves have to obey; they're obeying God. That's right. The slaves obey as though
they're obeying God. And the slave owners remember you're going to go in front of
a judgment seat where there's going to be no difference between slave and slavers,
except that you have much more to answer for. And you will be judged without any
privileges at all. So the Catholic Church teaches the slave owners to behave
decently, and it teaches the slaves to behave decently. And then slavery steadily
loses its bite. It loses its bite and it eventually sort of dissolves. And that's
how Catholicism gets rid of slavery. But not by starting up a revolution. It's not
by building institutions or by smashing institutions. It's by changing hearts. And
institutions are simply the product of hearts. If you've got good hearts... Good
hearts, bad institutions, no real problem. Good institutions, bad hearts, you've
got a problem.

I mean, look what's happening with the American constitution. The American
Constitution, you know, there are many worse. There are surely many, many worse.
But look what a monkey this character in the White House has now made of it. And
all his rats, his surrounding rats, and his media on all of it, they just
completely destroyed justice. They made a complete monkey of justice and truth.
Justice, truth, and decency, completely ridiculed. Incredible. But that's because
of what's going on in the hearts. What will be the Catholic Church's answer to Mr.
William Jefferson Clinton? Woof. I won't answer that question. But if there... it
would be if he could convert. I mean, if he... He's very smart. He's a real
politician. If he converted and used all of his gifts for the good of the nation,
he might do something. He might really do something. These villains can convert. It
doesn't often happen, alas, because that's the way human nature is, but they can
convert. That's what one has to pray for.

Well, then anger. Brooding is the fountainheads, exploding is the rivers, and the
angels in both Old Testament and New Testament tell that anger is a sin that can be
punished. I was saying that today's love, love, love has got anger as the very
swift flip side. You see the people coming into the stores and if they don't get
what they want and they don't get it yesterday, they turn angry. A doctor I've told
you, quoted many times, a doctor from Nebraska who once told me that his patients
come in the door and they want health, beauty, and youth, and they want it
yesterday, and he's no good if he can't deliver. And it's absurd, but that's the
expectation. And if the expectation isn't fulfilled, then it's anger. Shoo.

### Fourth Vial: Pride (Verses 8-9)

So, all right, verse 8. What a SEALGAP. S-E-A-L-G-A-P. Pride. Okay. Vanity. Vanity
or pride. Verse 8, vanity or pride. The fourth angel poured out his vial upon the
sun. The sun is me, the ego. The sun is me. "And it was given to afflict men with
great heat and fire." The heat is ambition when things go well for pride, and the
fire is anger when things go badly. Verse 9, pride refuses all penance. Just like
Clinton. "I haven't done anything wrong." Pride refuses all penance.

### Fifth Vial: Envy (Verses 10-11)

Verse 10, rather, envy. "And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of
the beast, and a dark kingdom came about and they chewed their tongues for pain,
and they blasphemed the God of heaven for their pain and their wounds, and they did
not do penance from their works." Verse 10, envy. Subjecting men to the rule of the
devil. Envy subjects men to the rule of the devil. It makes a dark kingdom, in
other words. They eat their tongues, it's slander and calumny. Slander and calumny
spoken by the envious. And, again, that they do no penance means it's difficult to
correct.

### Sixth Vial: Avarice (Verses 12-16)

Verse 12, the sixth angel poured out his vial upon that great river, the Euphrates,
and dried up its water in order that a way be prepared for the kings from the
rising of the sun. "And I saw from the mouth of the dragon, from the mouth of the
beast, and from the mouth of the pseudo-prophet three unclean spirits in the manner
of frogs. For because they are spirits of the devil's working signs and proceeding
to the kings of all of the earth, to collect them together for war against the
great day of the Almighty Lord." "And behold, I come like a thief. Blessed is he
who is watching and keeps his clothes clean, lest he walk naked and they see his
disgrace." "And he will gather them together in a place which is called in Hebrew,
Armageddon."

Avarice. Avarice. The Euphrates leaves behind... As the Euphrates leaves behind
mud, so avarice leaves behind only sin. He poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates and dried up its water. "Dried up its water" is to demonstrate the
fleetingness of temporal goods. Demonstrate the fleetingness of temporal goods; the
passingness, the fact that they pass, that they're of very, very brief duration.
They do not last. The kings of verse 14 are the preachers of truth. And the Son is
Christ. Drying up the worldly goods in order to make way for the preachers of truth
and for Christ. The dragon, the beast, and the pseudo-prophet. And from the mouth
of the dragon and from the mouth of the beast and from the mouth of the prophet, I
saw three unclean spirits come out in the manner of frogs. The dragon is
concupiscence of the eyes. The beast is the pride of life. And the pseudo-prophet
is concupiscence of the flesh.

### Seventh Vial: Sloth (Verse 17)

And then finally, the seventh vial of verse 17 is sloth, which is like drifting...
The slothful are like drifting air. Achieving nothing, going nowhere, doing
nothing. Slothful men are like the drifting air. "And the seventh angel poured out
his vial upon the air." The slothful are like drifting air.

## Conclusion and Continuation

We will pick up again tomorrow, and I will look for the text on The Protocols.

```
{
    "date": "22-02-1999"
}
```