Bishop Williamson examines historical Church crises, champions of orthodoxy, and
apocalyptic warnings relevant to contemporary challenges.

# Historical Parallels, Modern Errors, and the Apocalypse

Bishop Williamson says that St. Hilary of Poitiers resisted the Arian heresy, which
he explains is the closest parallel in Church history to the current crisis, although
today's problems go much further. He points out that Pope Liberius excommunicated
Athanasius, an act documented in Denzinger-Schonmetzer, which he suggests was
included to show that popes can err. 

Bishop Williamson discusses 19th-century anti-liberal figures like Cardinal Pie, 
Louis Veuillot, and Dom Guéranger, presenting them as models of doctrinal integrity. 
He criticizes Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira and TFP for what he terms "laicism" — a 
principled avoidance of clergy — and for discouraging priestly vocations, contrasting 
this with Bishop de Castro Mayer's fidelity. 

He explains that the Church's indefectibility means that even if popes
err gravely, the Church itself will not fail, with figures like Athanasius or
Archbishop Lefebvre upholding doctrine. He warns against the twin errors of
Liberalism and Sedevacantism. Bishop Williamson then interprets Apocalypse chapter
12, detailing the persecution of the woman (representing the Church, Mary, or
saintly souls) by the dragon, and briefly introduces chapter 13's themes of the
Antichrist and a "false church," connecting these to the Third Secret of Fatima.

## St. Hilary and the Arian Heresy: A Parallel to Today

St. Hilary of Poitiers. What heresy did he resist? It was the Arian Heresy. He
lived in the 300s; he was a contemporary of Athanasius. He was Bishop of Poitiers
in France, fighting alongside Athanasius against the Arian Heresy. He wrote 14
books about the Holy Trinity. The breviary today quotes Saint Jerome saying that
one "can walk with safe foot through all the works of Hilary," meaning one need not
be afraid of contamination by heresy.

The Arian Heresy was an extraordinary affair. It is the closest parallel in Church
history to what is going on today, although what is happening today goes a lot
further than the Arian Heresy.

## Papal Fallibility: The Case of Pope Liberius

At the height of the Arian Heresy, you had Pope Liberius, I think in 369,
excommunicating Athanasius. You can find in Denzinger-Schonmetzer the text of Pope
Liberius's letters to the Bishops of the East saying, "Come on guys, be nice to
me, I've excommunicated him!"

## Denzinger-Schonmetzer and Historical Candor

Now, why would Denzinger-Schonmetzer put that in? One might suggest it's because
they are very thorough, and indeed they are. However, I doubt that truth is the
sole reason. The latest edition of Denzinger-Schonmetzer dates from around 1976.
The classic edition was Denzinger-Banwart, but now Denzinger-Schonmetzer is common,
though it always gives the old numbering. Schonmetzer put in a lot more texts.

Why would Schonmetzer include the letters of Pope Liberius? To show that the Pope
can err. That is why he would have put it in. Some people claim the letters are
fraudulent, but I very much doubt it, because the truth is that in 369, Liberius
did excommunicate Athanasius.

## The Duration of Crises: Arianism vs. Modern Times

When was that Arian mess cleared up? It was at the First Council of Constantinople
in 381. So from 369 to 381, that is only 12 years. That's peanuts compared with us.
We have been sweating it out for 40 years. Interestingly, 40 years from 1958 when
John XXIII became pope. In 2002, they will be commemorating the opening of Vatican
II, if the world is still around.

It is true that Arianism began getting going after the Council of Nicaea, which was
in 325. So if you count from 325 to 381, well, that is longer. It took a little
while for Arianism to really get underway. The Council of Nicaea was against
Arianism. Athanasius attended the council as a deacon. Arius, a priest in
Alexandria, started publishing his heresy. It seems Arianism was there before Nicaea,
which is why Nicaea nailed it, but it only really got going afterwards. That is my
impression, though I am not a historian.

Michael Davis has written a little book about Athanasius, which would almost
certainly cover the Arian heresy as well. He is a good historian. That booklet
would be well worth reading.

Hilary was a defender of the true doctrine of the Holy Trinity: Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, absolutely equal, co-eternal, and consubstantial, as in the creed of
St. Athanasius.

## Defenders of the Faith: Historical Examples

### Cardinal Pie: The Anti-Liberal Doctor

Who was sometimes called the second great bishop of Poitiers? Cardinal Pie. He was
the great anti-liberal doctor of the second half of the 19th century. He began
writing around 1848 and was later made Bishop of Poitiers. As Bishop, he was one of
the outstanding adversaries of 19th-century liberalism, which was basically the
same liberalism as today. It has mutated, but not significantly. The problem is
much more the same than it is essentially different, deep down. Cardinal Pie died
around 1880 or 1882. He flourished around 1860-1870, shedding a great deal of
light.

### Louis Veuillot and Dom Guéranger: Lay and Clerical Resistance

Who were the other great anti-liberals in France during the high point of
liberalism? Louis Veuillot. He was a journalist who edited *L'Univers*, a Catholic
daily paper in Paris. He converted, went to Rome, saw what the whole thing was
about, and then absolutely nailed the errors day by day in *L'Univers*. A great
man. Dr. John Rao is a great fan of Louis Veuillot.

Louis Veuillot was a layman, but he was also an acquaintance of another great
anti-liberal combatant from France in that same period, 1850 to 1880, during the
pontificate of Pope Pius IX: Dom Guéranger. Dom Guéranger was another great
anti-liberal. Louis Veuillot used to go to Dom Guéranger's monastery at Solesmes
and do retreats there.

Louis Veuillot had enormous good sense, supernatural and natural. He was just a
sane man, through and through, naturally and supernaturally. Of peasant or working
stock, but a prince of the Church as far as fighting for the Church is concerned,
though a layman. Like many good laymen, he depended upon a priest. I do not think
you will find in the history of the Church a layman who did great things for the
Church without being guided by a priest. The priest could not do what Veuillot did,
in a newspaper office with all its distractions. But I am sure the influence of Dom
Guéranger was decisive for Louis Veuillot.

## The Dangers of Laicism: The Case of TFP

### Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira and TFP's Origins

For many a good layman, some priest is essential. That is the disaster of Dom
Plinio at the head of TFP (Tradition, Family, Property) in Brazil. God gave Dom
Plinio a great priest on whom he could have leaned and by whom he could have let
himself be guided: Bishop de Castro Mayer. Bishop de Castro Mayer was in Campos,
not far from Sao Paulo where TFP was based. They were always in contact.

Bishop de Castro Mayer only broke with TFP in 1983. There are some very interesting
documents about why Bishop de Castro Mayer broke with Plinio. He knew him a long
way back and supported TFP initially because it was Catholic and anti-communist.
Dr. Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira started TFP back in the 1940s or 1950s, a lay
organization of combatant Catholics to resist the revolution. They did valiant work
to protect Brazil from communism by nourishing Brazilian Catholics with good
doctrine.

### The Error of Laicism and Its Consequences

The problem is that Plinio knew the clergy in the '40s and '50s were already, most
of them, communist or semi-communist or worldly. The clergy was already largely
gone before Vatican II, with noble exceptions. You could not rely on getting the
proper answer from a priest. So Plinio started his own lay organization.

To start a lay organization because of the practical necessity of not leaning on
the clergy is one thing, but to make a principle of not leaning on the clergy is
quite another. Laicism is the implicit heresy of TFP. TFP pulls a lot of young men
into its service, making them live chastely without marrying, and effectively
stops them from going to the priesthood. TFP paralyzes and has always paralyzed
vocations. It is a grave fault to pretend to defend the Catholic Church and then,
at the same time, to paralyze vocations.

If Plinio had wanted to listen to Bishop de Castro Mayer, God had placed him there.
Plinio cannot claim he was abandoned by the clergy. When Plinio went before his
maker a few years ago, he would not have been able to say, "Lord God, you did not
give me a priest to guide me," because God did. If anybody, at any time, wants to
know the will of God, it will be findable. God will never leave souls without the
possibility of reaching Him.

## Bishop de Castro Mayer: A Model of Doctrinal Fidelity

Plinio did have a bishop to go to, and a good bishop: Bishop de Castro Mayer. You
all ought to read *The Mouth of the Lion* by Dr. David Allen White. It is very
readable, like a detective novel.

### "Earthquake-Proofing" the Diocese

Dr. White describes how Bishop de Castro Mayer earthquake-proofed his diocese.
Bishop de Castro Mayer was smart in the best sense and could see what was coming.
He knew this new, false Catholicism, the new theology, inside out. He wrote a
marvelous catechism of the new errors, which goes through them one by one – exactly
the same errors as today, Vatican II errors, before Vatican II – laying out the
error and then distinguishing it from truth. It is excellent and should be read.

Bishop de Castro Mayer knew that people needed doctrine to stay Catholic. In his
little diocese, glorious by its fidelity, he set up a catechism system whereby all
the people got to know their doctrine, the real doctrine. So when Vatican II came,
he gave all his priests the option: they could either say the New Mass or stay with
the Old Mass. As bishop, he would cover them. Most of his priests stayed with the
Old Mass. Those who stayed with him and the Old Mass formed the group of priests
still saying the Old Mass in that diocese today.

### Support for Archbishop Lefebvre

Bishop de Castro Mayer was a great bishop, though not according to the world.
Events brought out what a great man he was. For instance, when the consecrations by
Archbishop Lefebvre took place in 1988, Bishop de Castro Mayer stepped forward of
his own will. He was an old and frail man, not far from death (he died in 1991,
months after the Archbishop). He made the journey all the way to Europe to
co-consecrate and gave a wonderful little sermon at the ceremony. He said it was a
duty of conscience for him to be there to support Archbishop Lefebvre, because it
was a question of professing the faith before the whole world. That action alone is
the action of a great bishop.

Bishop de Castro Mayer was a great bishop primarily because he was a doctrinal
bishop. He knew his doctrines through and through. He had taught in the seminary
and would come into lessons without any notes, teaching dogma purely out of his
head. He was very humble, physically small, someone you would not notice in a
crowd. I remember seeing him in La Reja, Argentina, quietly praying his rosary.

## The Dangers of TFP's Trajectory

He was available for Plinio, but Plinio wanted to go his own way, and so TFP became
a cult. Dr. White wrote a chapter on TFP in *The Mouth of the Lion*. The first
version was quite lively, but after threats of a lawsuit, it was modified. The
original was more provocative.

Plinio went wrong and got into an absurd, ridiculous, blasphemous cult of his own
personality by the end. This is mostly hidden from most people in TFP, and TFP
vigorously denies any such thing. But facts are facts, and it is known for
certain that in the inner circles of TFP, it is a dangerous and absurd cult. It is
a great shame because Plinio was a great mind, an anti-liberal, and an
anti-revolutionary. His book *Revolution and Counter-Revolution* is very good.

He slid from an understandable practice of avoiding flawed clergy into a false
principle of refusing the clergy in principle, and that is a no-no. The real
answer was, of course, Archbishop Lefebvre, who, confronted with the same problem
of false clergy, decided, "Well, we'll start again. We'll remake good clergy." A
layman could not do that, true. But a layman could at least have abstained from
building an organization around the principle that we do not need the clergy or
vocations. It is an understandable error given how wrong many clergy were in the
'40s and '50s.

Bishop de Castro Mayer, in documents that will appear, attacks this heresy of
laicism. He says it is heresy because it is of faith that Our Lord founded the
Church on this clergy. Our Lord took into account that clergy are human and make
mistakes. That is why Catholics always have to distinguish between the human and
divine in the Church. Our Lord Himself is human and divine. His Church is human and
divine. The human part of Our Lord was never in sin or error, a slight difference
with the Church, whose human part is often in sin and error. But that does not
touch the principles of the Church and the teaching of Our Lord.

As today's Gospel of St. Hilary, a Doctor of the Church, says (Matthew 5:18):
"Amen I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall not
pass of the Law till all be fulfilled." This applies even to the moral part of the
Old Law.

## The Indefectibility of the Church and Papal Error

The way Our Lord built the Church cannot change, and it cannot fail completely and
absolutely. Obviously, the Catholic Church has failed over a large part of the
Earth in Arianism and today in neo-modernism. But it is impossible that the Church
should completely defect. The indefectibility of the Church does not mean that the
Pope cannot go gravely wrong, because these last popes have gone gravely wrong.
What indefectibility means is that even if the Pope goes gravely wrong, still the
Church is built on him as upon a rock. The Catholic Church without a pope is
inconceivable.

Secondly, some other doctor like Athanasius and Hilary will be maintaining the
doctrine while the popes go wrong. Athanasius, Hilary, and others like them were
like the temporary carriers of the Church's indefectibility. The normal carrier is
the Pope, but he is not the indispensable carrier. The Pope can go very wrong.

## Navigating Modern Errors: Liberalism and Sedevacantism

If you exaggerate the degree to which the Pope cannot go wrong, you are bound to
become either a Liberal or a Sedevacantist. And the two are much closer to one
another than either is to a Catholic. The Liberal is far from a Catholic. A
Sedevacantist is closer to a Catholic than the Liberal is. Sedevacantism is not the
worst sin in the book.

Why are Sedevacantists closer? Because the better Sedevacantists do have the faith.
If they did not have the faith, there would be no problem with the Pope being off
his head. For them, it is a real problem because they believe in the papacy, the
Church, and Our Lord.

Sedevacantism is a trap, the right-hand trap as opposed to the left-hand trap of
Liberalism. On a golf course, you have sand traps on both sides of the fairway.
Most golfers hook (left) rather than slice (right), so Liberalism is a much more
common error than Sedevacantism.

The moderate Sedevacantists keep quiet about it. The rabid ones are like Feeneyites;
it is their dogma of faith: if you do not think these popes are not popes, or if
you believe in baptism of desire, you are not Catholic. Crazy. But between
Liberalism and Catholicism, there is a great gulf fixed.

## Interpreting the Apocalypse: Chapter 12 - The Woman and the Dragon

Let us turn back to the Apocalypse, chapter 12, one of the most famous parts and
one of direct application to today: the dragon pursuing the woman.

We saw verse 14: "And there were given to the woman two wings of a great eagle,
that she might fly into the desert unto her place, where she is nourished for a
time and times and a half a time." The two wings represent wisdom to unravel
heresies and patience to endure persecution by fleeing to the desert (verse 6),
where she is nourished. Time equals one year, so three and a half times equals
1,260 days, the duration of the persecution, with the Anti-Christ standing for any
persecution. The Church hides inside souls, and souls hide with God. The Church is
disappearing from the outside structures and taking refuge inside souls, exactly
what is happening today. Cardinal Mindszenty, when the communists took over his
episcopal palace, the Church was still in his soul inside the communist prison.

Verse 15: "And the serpent cast out of his mouth after the woman, water as it were
a river; that he might cause her to be carried away by the river." This water is a
flood, not of living water, but of false doctrine to sweep souls away from Mother
Church. We see that today, a flood of false doctrine from the media.

There are multiple levels of interpretation. One: the woman is the Church. Two: the
woman is the Blessed Virgin Mary. Three (moral sense): the woman is holy souls,
saintly souls yearning for heaven.

In the moral sense (explanation three), saintly souls under persecution engender
Christ, give birth to Christ. They become more Christian, closer to Christ. The
saintly soul flies with devotion and patience to contemplation. The dragon pursues
the saintly soul. The two wings (verse 14) are devotion and patience, flying to the
desert of contemplation. The Devil lets loose after it a flood of sensual
memories. For example, St. Benedict fled the world and lived in a cave near
Subiaco. Tempted by sensual memories of Rome, he jumped into a thorn bush and was
freed from then on.

### The Earth's Assistance

Verse 16: "And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the river, which the dragon cast out of his mouth."
Explanation one (allegorical, woman as Church): the earth is the secular princes
who, after Constantine, helped the Church clean up heresies with the secular arm.
The mouth the earth opens is the bishops, like at the Council of Nicaea, who
swallowed up heresy and refuted it, like Athanasius.

### The Dragon's War on Remaining Christians

Verse 17: "And the dragon was angry against the woman: and went to make war with
the rest of her seed, who keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ." The dragon makes war on the remainder of Christians, those who have
not fled to the desert or vigorously reacted. He does not make war on fallen
Christians; those belong to him.

Verse 18 (or end of 17 in some versions): "And he stood upon the sand of the sea."
The sand represents men enslaved to the world, who are as light as sand and as
unstable as the sea. Upon such men, the devil stands; he dominates them. You have
the expression "stairs of sand"—something utterly unreliable.

Any questions on chapter 12?
A question about verse 4: "And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven,
and cast them to the earth." Could this refer to fallen angels? Yes, that might be,
if you are thinking of the fourth level of explanation, Lucifer against Michael. I
would think so.

## Glimpse into Apocalypse Chapter 13: The Two Beasts

Chapter 13 is about the two beasts. The first beast is the Antichrist. The second
beast is a false lamb. Who would that be? The false church. This is why it very
much applies to today.

We previously discussed the locust neo-modernists in chapter 9, which also very
much applies. Sister Lucia of Fatima said that the Third Secret overlaps chapters 8
to 13 of the Apocalypse. Cardinal Ratzinger said something like, "It's all in
scripture." But Sister Lucy specified chapters 8 to 13. So it is these very
chapters that concern what is going on today. The first beast is the Antichrist,
and the second beast, the false lamb, assists him. That would be the false church.
Someone suggested Pope Francis for the false lamb. He is a genuine skunk, not a
false lamb. The false lamb is the false church.

```
{
    "date": "14-01-1999"
}
```