Bishop Williamson offers an exegesis of Revelation chapters 15 and 16, 
connecting the seven last plagues and vials of wrath to the Church's history, 
the fate of the Jews, the rise of heresies, and the challenges of the modern 
world.

# The Vials of Wrath and the Church's Trials

Bishop Williamson explains that Revelation Chapter 15 introduces the seven last
plagues, representing God's fulfilled wrath particularly in the last times, and
details how Christians escape this wrath through a life of spiritual
progression. He says the chapter also describes the Church as Christ's humanity
and tradition as the unanimous teaching of the evangelists, critiquing modern
theologians like John Paul II for allegedly downplaying Hell. 

Bishop Williamson states that the Jews, while retaining natural gifts, lost their primary
election to the Catholic Church, their choice becoming a curse upon rejecting
Christ, though God will ultimately rescue a remnant.

He then continues that Chapter 16 details the pouring out of seven vials of wrath by
angels, representing preachers with divine mission and jurisdiction, upon
agents of the Antichrist, applicable also to the Church's ages. Bishop
Williamson describes the first vial as affecting the unrepentant Jews (AD 70),
the second affecting the pagan Gentiles through martyrdom and conversion, and
the third vial targeting heretics and heresiarchs, whose actions lead to their
own "bloody punishment," exemplified by historical conflicts like the Thirty
Years' War stemming from heresies.

## Understanding Revelation Chapter 15: Prelude to God's Justice

(Transcript starts): Are there any questions on Chapter 15? We covered it
somewhat quickly. Chapter 15 acts as an introduction to the vision of the
seven cups, which is Chapter 16. Chapter 15 presents the preachers of God's
justice: firstly, those who escape it; secondly and thirdly, those who fall
victim to it.

### The Seven Angels and the Seven Last Plagues

Verse one states: "I saw another sign, a great and wondrous sign in heaven:
seven angels having seven plagues, the seven last plagues." These are the latest
plagues because in them the wrath of God is fulfilled, suggesting particular
application to the last times. The seven angels represent the totality of the
preachers of the Gospel in all ages. The word "angel" in Greek means an
announcer or messenger. "Evangelion," meaning "good message" in Greek, was
adopted by Latin. "Eu" means good, and "angelion" means announcement or
message; thus, "evangel" or "gospel" means a good message. The seven plagues
include the loss of God, fire, coal, darkness, stench, and the trumpet of
devils, fulfilling God's wrath.

### Escaping God's Wrath: The Christian Life

How do we escape these? By leading a Christian life, which divides into three
stages: beginners, those making progress, and the perfect. The sea here stands
for baptism, comparable to the Red Sea, making the soul translucent as glass.
The glass represents the soul cleansed of original sin and lit from within by
the fire of the Holy Ghost. "Standing" refers to baptized Christians scorning
and standing up to the Antichrist by virtue of their baptism. Harps are their
means of making progress in the Christian life.

Verse three presents the third category: the perfect Christians, who are
singing and always giving thanks to God. These perfect Christians come from
both the Old and New Testaments—Moses and the Lamb—for all His works are wise.
He is to be feared but glorified, for He alone is merciful (verse four).

### The Tabernacle, Christ's Humanity, and the Apostles

Verse five: the tabernacle of the testament is the temporary dwelling on Earth
of those testifying to the truth—in other words, the Church. The temple of the
tabernacle of the testament is the humanity of Christ, which was closed like the
Old Testament temple until Christ came and, by His coming, revealed the divine
mystery. It is in heaven, shining brilliantly for all who look upwards, above
earthly concerns.

Then came forth seven angels. The apostles depart from the temple, which stands
for the Old Law. They come out, holding the seven plagues, announcing penance
and judgment. Clothed in linen, their souls are brilliant with the fire and
freshness of grace. Their breasts are bound with the golden law of charity,
Christ's law of charity.

And one of the four living creatures (animals) gave to the seven angels seven
golden vials full of the wrath of God, who lives forever and ever. These
"animals" are the four evangelists. "One of them" stands for the unanimity of
their teachings—in other words, Tradition. The vials of gold represent hearts
full of true charity. Therefore, they teach in the wrath of God; it is charity
to teach the truth about Heaven and Hell. It is the opposite of charity to
preach that Hell doesn't exist or that nobody goes there.

### Critique of Modern Eschatology: John Paul II

Have any of you seen or read *The Threshold of Hope* by John Paul II? There's a
terrible chapter in it about the last things, where he suggests, without
explicitly saying so, that doctrines are outdated or that Vatican II has
updated Hell. He truly suggests this. He implies we have a new doctrine of the
last things, where the individual no longer goes before the judgment seat of
God—a concept that inspired powerful preaching in the past. Instead, Vatican II
emphasizes the Church, so the individual's appalling moment of judgment is
somewhat swamped by how the Church is judged. It's all presented as "love, love,
love," of course.

Yes, he says things like that. That is his style. Even if he doesn't state it
explicitly, the style is similar. It's terrible. That's why he has what I call
a "goofy" expression; he seems to live in a dreamland where nobody goes to
Hell. Michael Matt has a good article in the latest *Remnant* about John Paul
II's recent visit to the United States, specifically St. Louis. Matt says,
among other things, that the Pope has the saddest face he has ever seen. The
Pope reminds him of a dreamer searching everywhere for a place where his dream
has succeeded. That's essentially it. It's not a bad article. Michael Matt is
writing some good things in *The Remnant*; he is getting stronger, and *The
Remnant* is moving in the right direction under his guidance. I think the son,
Michael Matt, is a better man than his father, Walter Matt, at least as shown
at present.

### The Temple Filled with Smoke: Judaism's Refusal

The vials are full of the wrath of God, who lives forever and ever. They teach
the anger of God so that men will escape from Hell. Verse 8: "And the temple
was filled with smoke from the majesty of God and from his power, and no one
could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were
fulfilled." The refusal of Christ by the Jews meant that Judaism filled with
smoke, and almost no Jews entered the Church until the end of her preaching—that
is, until the end of the world.

### The Status of the Jews: Gifts, Curses, and Future Hope

This relates to the Jews, the chosen people. They are still chosen in the sense
that, as Romans says, "God's gifts are without recall." The Jews retain many of
the extraordinary gifts God gave them, which is why they can be so powerful in
media and politics, often taking over if allowed by foolish Gentiles. However,
in the real sense, their chosenness has passed to the Catholic Church. What use
are natural gifts if they merely plunge one deeper into Hell? The gifts become a
curse, and even the choice becomes a curse. This is what has happened to the
Jews; their choice has become a curse. A people singled out with special gifts
made it a curse for themselves, calling down, "His blood be upon us and upon
our children." They called down upon themselves as a curse the mission they
refused.

This can be illustrated by a rhombus. In geometry, a rhombus is a parallelogram
with four equal sides. (I wish to announce that the English language you are
hearing bears only a faint resemblance to the King's English, but one
understands.) To illustrate with the rhombus: here, the Jews were chosen,
starting with Abraham, who was called out of Ur of the Chaldees. This was the
beginning of their ascent to election. At this point, the Jews were elect, and
the Gentiles were often despised by them. God told the Jews to stay away from
the Gentiles, not to despise them, but to keep uncontaminated by pagans. This
represents the sea of the Gentiles.

But then, Our Lord Jesus Christ comes. At that point, the Gentiles ascend to
form the Catholic Church. Simultaneously, many Jews, by their own choice, begin
a decline. Very few Jews maintain their election in its true sense; it turns
into a curse by their own choice. Their privileges transfer, and much more so,
to Catholics, who are far more elect in real supernatural terms than the Jews
ever were. In natural terms, the Jews remain gifted—musicians, comics, etc.
But, as Saint Paul says, the election of the Jews is to the election of Catholics
as shadow to the real thing. This is what makes proud Jews so resentful; they
feel pushed aside. Yet they weren't; they only had to enter the Catholic Church,
like Peter, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew, Joseph of Arimathea, the Mother
of God, and the Apostles, who are the glory and foundation of the Church. In
what sense are the rest of the Jews still chosen? Not very much in human terms,
except they are still close to God's heart, and He will rescue them.

God does chastise them. They are severely chastised even today as they return to
world power due to the criminal apostasy of the Gentiles. This return to power
is still a curse for them, as it gives them the power to commit terrible sins
against all mankind, by which they will damn their souls for eternity—worse
than if they had remained in ghettos. Therefore, all their gifts turn to
poison as long as they remain as they are. However, they are specially
chastised by God. This is absolutely Scripture; it's Saint Paul. Our Lord
Himself says, "You are not children of Abraham."

So, the Temple of Judaism fills with smoke. Almost none enter the Church until
the end of the Church's preaching, which is the end of the world. Similarly,
sinners who refuse apostolic teaching cause the Church to fill with smoke, and
they exclude themselves from it.

Regarding Chapter 15, chronologically, it might seem intermixed, but the idea
is that the apostles spread the doctrine originating from Our Lord. Then there
are the four evangelists. The source of doctrine carried by the apostles, and
the closest we get to that source today, is the four Gospels. The seven angels
"came out" of the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony, and the temple is
Christ's humanity. So, this doctrine comes forth from Christ. That is why the
seven angels represent the apostles immediately carrying out Christ's doctrine,
as condensed in the four Gospels.

## Revelation Chapter 16: The Seven Vials of God's Wrath

Now for Chapter 16: the seven vials, or cups, or containers—Styrofoam mugs, if
you like, though they might melt from God's wrath. We must update our imagery.
Firstly, while these events relate to the end of times, there is also an
application to the seven ages of the Church, as we will see.

Verse 1: "And I heard a great voice from the temple saying to the seven angels,
Go and pour out the seven vials of the wrath of God upon the earth." Chapter 16
shows the preachers of the Church fulfilling their mission of pouring out vials
of God's wrath upon the diverse agents of the Antichrist. There is also a moral
sense related to seven sins, which we will return to. First, the
quasi-historical sense.

### The Divine Mission and Jurisdiction of Preachers

This mission is to pour out the vials of God's wrath upon the Antichrist's
diverse agents. The "great voice from the temple" is the voice of God speaking
from the Church. He speaks alone, comparable to Exodus 25:22: "Thence will I
give orders and will speak to thee over the propitiatory, and from the midst of
the two cherubim which shall be upon the ark of the testimony, all things which
I will command the children of Israel by thee." In Exodus 25, God instructs
Moses on setting up the Holy of Holies, from where He will speak to Moses.

The command "Go" signifies the divine mission necessary for preachers,
canonically known as jurisdiction. The priesthood involves, one, ordination
(consecration), and two, jurisdiction (a diocese or parish). A bishop is
consecrated and then given a diocese by the Pope. A priest is ordained and then
given a parish by the bishop.

A few weeks ago, Bishop Bernard Harrington was inducted as Bishop of Winona.
Something of the old ceremony remains. He was seated, I believe by Archbishop
Weakland of Milwaukee. Bishop Harrington, in his sermon, referred to himself as
"Bernie the Spirit." He also said, caricaturing slightly, "I'd like to thank my
predecessor who set things up so well for me. Give him a hand, folks," clapping
himself from the pulpit. It was rather "el cheapo." Bishop Harrington is a
performer; he has that Irish blarney and knows how to push people's buttons. He
knows his way around.

But his induction itself is normal. He was consecrated several years ago and was
an auxiliary in Detroit, I believe. Now he has been given his own diocese; that
is the jurisdiction, and he is the pastor of this flock. This is completely
normal. What surprised me watching the ceremony was how much solid tradition
remains, rather than just the "wacky" elements, though it was wacky. There was
a Mass, and his relatives brought up offerings, and he hugged and kissed them.
But the core idea of a pastor being officially introduced and put in charge of
his flock is absolutely solid, and that element is still there.

The Winona Cathedral was full, and there was a sense of a congregation, a
flock. Then, a folk singer would interject at regular intervals, looking a bit
"zonky," spreading his arm to encourage communal singing. He was joined by a
female singer. The two of them would gesture, "Sing up, folks!" And the people
would sing. Compared with the old ways, it was "el cheapo," but there is still
something there.

Could it be revived? With a strong Pope who could survive in Rome, handpick
bishops with power and backing, a great deal could be revived. Even here,
something could be picked up, though much is gone and people are far gone.
Still, I think something solid remains that could be revived. Perhaps I
overestimate it. There were many bishops present, perhaps eight or ten—local,
retired, even archbishops like Archbishop Roach. Some may have been unable to
attend due to cold weather grounding planes around January 5th or 6th. So, it
was an occasion, but the lack of dignity was striking. They spoke more than
ever about the dignity of man, yet the ceremonies lacked dignity. I recall the
main host was very large, presumably so everyone could see it, which is not the
idea. (If anyone wants to watch the videotape, I might show it sometime.)

Alright, "Go" signifies the mission, the jurisdiction, which preachers need.
One needs a mission and jurisdiction to preach and hear confessions, formerly
controlled by canon law. If the Society [SSPX] seems to pay no attention, it is
because it rightly assumes its priests are serious enough for jurisdiction to
be supplied by the souls who come to them. As a soul comes, it brings down
jurisdiction. The Society itself doesn't have ordinary jurisdiction, nor do the
souls, but souls coming to its priests trigger jurisdiction from the Church.
This is a completely reasonable doctrine.

### The First Vial: Upon the Earth (The Jews)

Verse 2: "And the first went and poured out his vial upon the earth, and there
fell a sore and grievous wound upon men who had the character of the beast, and
upon those who adored his image." The application to the Antichrist is obvious,
but let's look at the other application.

The first angel represents the college of apostles going out on Christ's own
orders. This corresponds to the first age of the Church, showing an
application of the seven cups to the Church's ages. Here, "the earth"
represents the Jews, a garden specially cultivated by God, which, for the most
part, grew only brambles. This is a mystery of God's providence. Yet, never
forget that the Jews, despite their state at Our Lord's time, produced the
greatest triumph of Judaism: the Blessed Virgin Mary. Her parents, St. Joachim
and St. Anne, and their lineage back through grandparents and great-grandparents,
must have been of great quality to produce her. So, amidst the corruption of
the scribes and Pharisees, extraordinary roses grew in this special garden. The
Jewish race succeeded in being the cradle of the Messiah. The corruption was
not total; there was at least one such couple, and likely more, supporting
saints like Joachim and Anne. Thus, the Jews did not entirely fail by the time
Our Lord came.

They also produced the twelve Apostles. Without Our Lord's instruction, the
Apostles would have been blind and dumb, as seen even right before the
Ascension. After three years with Him, the Resurrection, and Holy Week, they
still asked when He would "zap the Romans." Our Lord told them to wait ten days
for the Holy Ghost, who might help them understand what three and a half years
had failed to achieve. Nevertheless, with the Holy Ghost's help and Our Lord's
teaching, these Apostles became the founders of the Church, the twelve pillars
on which it is built. So, again, the Jews as a race did not fail in their
ultimate mission, though the great mass of them did. The few necessary to
fulfill God's plan were there. This was the culmination of 2,000 years of God's
labor to prepare for the Catholic Church.

So, the first angel is the college of apostles. The "earth" is the Jews. The
"wound" is the destruction of Jerusalem in AD 70, deadly to anti-Christians but
not to Christians. The apostles' preaching in Jerusalem, when rejected, led to
the obstinacy of the Jews that brought about Jerusalem's destruction in AD 70.
Had they listened and repented of killing Our Lord, Jerusalem would not have
been destroyed. Thus, the apostles' preaching *per accidens* generated the
Jewish obstinacy leading to this punishment. Therefore, the vial was poured
"upon the earth, and there was a terrible wound" upon those "who had the
character of the beast"—that is, upon the Jews who refused Christ. The literal
application refers to followers of the Antichrist. We will return to the moral
meaning concerning the seven capital sins later.

### The Second Vial: Upon the Sea (The Gentiles)

Verse 3: "And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea, and it became
blood as of a dead man; and every living soul died in the sea." The second
angel represents the apostles, now preaching to the violent and unstable "sea"
of the Gentiles. The sea again signifies violence, instability, and the pagan
world.

So, the second vial is the apostles preaching to the Gentiles. The "blood as of
a dead man" signifies the persecution of the martyrs. "As of a dead man" means
this blood is deadly to the persecutors, not like the blood of a wounded man
who might recover, but of one who will not live again. Thus, the Roman Empire
was destroyed by barbarian invasions. The persecutors of Christianity, for the
temporal death they inflicted on martyrs, received eternal death from God.
"Every living soul died in the sea" means every soul drowning in paganism
either converted (got out of the sea) or helped persecute and thus perished.
When apostolic preaching reached the perishing Gentile masses, they either
converted and were saved, or they refused, joined the persecution, and perished
as pagans.

Apply this to the modern world, for instance, the USA under Clinton. It is
quite obviously a pagan world. By no stretch of the imagination can one say the
great mass of people in the United States today will save their souls, barring
an extraordinary phenomenon of conversion. Instead, it is obvious these people
are plunging into and wallowing in their paganism; they are going to be damned.
"And every living soul died in the sea." Many are perishing in this wash of
paganism, pride, filth, and stupidity, as exemplified by events like the
Clinton debacle. The media line is often that "the president is not gloating,"
or "everyone's a loser," and "now we must all work together." The media can be
vile, but it's not solely their fault; it's also the fault of those who consume
it. The degradation of the media corresponds to the degradation of the people.
It's a terrible state of affairs, a massive corruption, just as the Book of
Revelation describes. The Apocalypse repeatedly states that the mass of people
are a mass of corruption, and those saved are exceptions who make a special
effort. This, I am afraid, is true. God have mercy upon us.

### The Third Vial: Upon Rivers and Fountains (Heretics)

Verse 4: "And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and the
fountains of waters, and they became blood." The third angel represents the
Doctors of the Church from the third, fourth, or fifth centuries. They poured
their vial upon the "rivers," which are the heretics flowing downhill to Hell.
They also poured it "upon the fountains of waters"—the sources, wellsprings, or
fountainheads from which a river starts.

The fountainheads are the heresiarchs, the leaders and originators of heresy.
A heresiarch is to heresy as a fountainhead is to its river. The "blood"
signifies their bloody punishment.

Verses 5-7: "And I heard the angel of the waters saying: Thou art just, O Lord,
who art, and who wast, the Holy One, because thou hast judged these things. For
they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood
to drink; for they have deserved it. And I heard another from the altar saying:
Yea, O Lord God Almighty, true and just are thy judgments."

The "waters" in verse 5, from which the angel speaks, are different from those
in verse 4. These are the living waters flowing from the throne of God. Verse 6
implies that heretics, being shedders of blood, must drink blood in Hell as a
fit punishment. Professor Vojta, who is Czech, explained how the Hussite heresy
led to much bloodshed. Similarly, Protestantism, within a few years of Luther,
led to the Peasants' Revolts, drowned in blood, and later the Thirty Years' War
(1618-1648), which devastated Germany with bloodshed, killing perhaps a third
of its population.

```
{
    "date": "15-02-1999"
}
```
