Bishop Williamson connects the decay in modern art and society to a rejection of God, 
contrasting it with the divine order symbolized in the Book of Revelation.

# Bishop Williamson: Modernism's Chaos and the Order of the Heavenly City

Bishop Williamson begins by connecting a verse from Revelation about the four-square 
city to Cubism, using this to launch into a discussion on modern art. He explains 
how Impressionism, Expressionism, and Abstract art illustrate the progressive 
dissolution of the object. Bishop Williamson then links this artistic decay to a 
broader societal and spiritual breakdown, evidenced by the rise of liberalism, 
socialism, communism, the erosion of hierarchy, and catastrophic events like 
World War I. 

He further illustrates this breakdown with examples from music, such as 
Schoenberg's 12-tone scale, and literature, notably T.S. Eliot's *The Wasteland*. 
Bishop Williamson explores the reasons the jaded bourgeoisie might embrace 
destructive art forms, suggesting a desperate search for vitality, and applies the 
principle *corruptio optima pessima* to explain the degradation of a once-Christian 
West. Finally, he returns to Revelation 21, offering a detailed allegorical 
interpretation of the Heavenly City, explaining the symbolism of its dimensions, 
materials (jasper, gold), and the twelve precious stone foundations as representing 
Christ, the apostles, and a host of Christian virtues.

## The Four-Square City and the Rise of Cubism

Verse 16 of Revelation, Chapter 21: "And the city lieth in a 
four square. The length thereof is as great as the breadth, and they measured the 
city with a golden reed for 12,000 furlongs; the length, and the height, and the 
breadth thereof are equal." What style of painting would be suitable for this? 
Jokingly, cubism.

Cubism emerged in the early 1900s, a little while before the First World War. 
What was going on in painting at that time? A little before Impressionism, which 
was in the 1870s, 1880s, 1890s. Impressionism originated in France. Italy and 
France are, I think, the most visually artistic countries, showing a number of 
innovations in the visual arts. Why was it called Impressionism? It was because, 
rather than a real representation of what is in front of you, impressionists 
portrayed the impression of the object. So, whereas painters had been pretty 
faithful to the object up until then, with Impressionism, they are giving you the 
impression of the object. For instance, in the middle of summer, everything might 
seem to shimmer in the heat, and it will be painted as shimmering, so all the 
outlines will be a little bit blurred.

A name was invented in the Catholic Church fairly recently, since modernism and even 
neo-modernism, to describe something new: Sedevacantism. And another name too. 
Sedevacantism is a name invented to sum up something that is real, even if what is 
real is quite a variety, a ragbag if you like. There are a number of different 
sedevacantists with a number of different opinions. Nevertheless, sedevacantism is a 
ragbag name for a bunch of people sorted in the same way. Similarly, impressionist 
painters are quite varied one from another, but the ragbag name signifies that the 
object is beginning to dissolve, so to speak. That is the end of the 19th century.

## The Dissolution of the Object in Modern Art

By the beginning of the 20th century, what was happening in the visual arts, 
especially painting, which is probably the most substantial yet flexible of the 
visual arts? It is more substantial than drawing and more flexible than sculpture. 
What was going on at the beginning of the 20th century in this process of the object 
dissolving? From Impressionism, art moved to Expressionism, and from Expressionism, 
of course, to abstract art, beginning about that time.

What does abstract art represent? You may well laugh. As far as the object is 
concerned, abstract art represents the breakdown or the breakup of the object. The 
tie with the object is being severed; the object is becoming unrecognizable. The 
whole motive of abstract art is to be separated from the object. It pretends that 
the shapes and colors on the canvas need have nothing to do with visual reality. It 
pretends that visual arts are just joining the state of music, which is considered an 
abstract art. There was a whole lot of theory about it.

In any case, cubism is one of the early versions; it is sort of the end of the 
object, the very end. It breaks down everything you see into terms of cubes, so that 
everything turns into a bunch of cubes. There is a famous portrait of a woman 
walking downstairs, which looks like a bunch of cubes. That is what the painting is. 
Soon, it will be all cubes and then no relation to the object at all, and that is 
abstract art. So, Impressionism, Expressionism, Cubism, Abstract art—it is all 
going in the direction of the breakdown of the object.

## Art as a Reflection of Societal Breakdown

What does that correspond to historically? Why does this kind of art arise at this 
point in history? Some suggest it is because they did not want the ********* system; 
the minds of everybody who had freedom wanted to do what they wanted. They were 
free. Why did they want more freedom of that kind? Why had people not wanted that 
freedom before? Why would most people before have considered that kind of freedom to 
be fairly insane? Because that kind of freedom is more acceptable nowadays.

What does it correspond to in music at that time? What was going on in literature? 
What was going on in music before the First World War? It was the breakdown of the 
major and minor scale. What was the scale replaced by? Basically, they democratized 
all the tones; it is the 12-tone scale, the 12-tone system. The main inventor was 
Arnold Schoenberg, Viennese, Jewish. This tells you quite a lot. They are clever; 
they have an instinct for subversion.

Dr. Andrew Childs explained the non-democratic major or minor scale. There is the 
tonic, there is the dominant; certain notes are more prominent, certain notes less 
prominent in any scale. The scale can start anywhere—C, C sharp, D, E flat, and so 
on—but once you take a certain scale, certain notes are more prominent and certain 
notes are less prominent. Has anybody listened to any 12-tone music? You may have 
listened a bit without knowing you were listening to it. It sounds pretty horrible, 
but it corresponds exactly to what is going on in the arts. It is the breakdown of 
the classical, of the normal.

Why was what is normal and classical breaking down at the end of the 19th century 
and beginning of the 20th century? And what was the enormous manifestation of that 
breakdown? A massive breakdown. As was said, "The lights are going out all over 
Europe, and we shall not see them lit again in our generation." This refers to World 
War I, which occurred from 1914 to 1918. That was the inner breakdown becoming 
outwardly manifest. Everybody thought the First World War would last just a few 
weeks. The French thought they would very soon be in Berlin; the Germans thought 
they would very soon be in Paris. It turned into a slugfest and lasted for four 
years, with an unimaginable slaughter of Europe's youth, the flower of Europe's 
youth.

Why World War I? Why the breakdown of the arts? Why the breakdown of music? At the 
end of the Victorian era, people were living good facades, but they wanted... Why was 
it the end of the Victorian era? Why was it not succeeded by its continuation? Why 
did it break down? It was not just because Victoria had reigned for 60 or 61 years. 
It was because of the current in society that people were leading themselves into 
debauchery. There was no principle there. As a result, there were no principles to 
anything, so they did things like ******, things like gambling. So naturally, you had 
these problems.

It is liberalism; it is the comeuppance of liberalism. The triumphant philosophy of 
the 19th century was liberalism. Hierarchy was breaking down, and all the artists 
decided that hierarchy did not amount to much. Society was basically coming into 
power to make this detachment from the hierarchy. What is the principle behind 
breaking down hierarchy? Freedom. And equality. And democracy. It is "Non serviam." 
Liberty and freedom are the same thing, one a Latin word and one a Germanic word.
Wherever there is God, there is going to be hierarchy. And wherever there is 
hierarchy, there is going to be a God. Dostoyevsky's officer asks, "If there is no 
God, why should I be a colonel?" Or captain. In other words, if there is no God, 
there is going to be no hierarchy in the army. An example of this actually happening 
is the communists in the Spanish Civil War (1936-1939), who began without officers, 
in theory. Of course, you can be darn sure there was actually somebody giving orders 
and somebody receiving them. But the theory was that they were all comrades and 
absolutely equal. It may also be true of the French Revolution; it would be normal 
if it was. So, the breakdown of hierarchy is basically and always simply the turning 
away from God.

## The Historical Roots of Modern Chaos

The whole of the 19th century was one long, slow turning away from God. What did the 
19th century begin with, historically, broadly speaking? Napoleon and the Napoleonic 
Wars, which were the continuation of the French Revolution. This was obviously the 
destruction of which class? The aristocrats. And what class rose to the top 
following the French Revolution? The middle class, the bourgeoisie. On what basis 
did the bourgeoisie arrive? What was their philosophy? Liberalism.

And then what happens to the middle class that set up liberalism? They get undercut 
by the lower class. On what basis do the lower class manage to undercut the middle 
class? What accusing finger do the lower class point at the middle class? The 
accusation leveled at the middle class is that all they want is swimming pools and 
comfort (or the equivalent of that time). All they want is a comfortable, secure 
life for themselves. It is selfish, it is materialistic. And are the lower class 
basically right? Yes, there is altogether too much truth in their accusation.

Because of what is true in their accusation, you have the rise of what new 
philosophy, following on liberalism, that the lower class brings with it in its 
revolt against the middle class? Socialism. And close on the heels of socialism, 
communism. It is all one gigantic process of breaking down the old hierarchical 
Christendom.

The middle class establish themselves comfortably and think they are secure. Louis 
Veuillot (V-E-U-I-L-L-O-T), a top-class French Catholic journalist—a genuine 
Catholic, very anti-liberal—said something interesting about this. He, as a 
Catholic, tried to defend the middle class, not in what they had become, because 
the middle class is an uneasy mixture of the Old World and the New World. They are 
neither communist nor Catholic; they are somewhere in between, like many people 
today. Louis Veuillot tried to come to their defense in everything that they still 
had that was Catholic, but they were not interested. Why? Because Veuillot would 
want them to go back to being fully Catholic. "Ah, that we don't want." So they 
would not listen to Veuillot, and the result is they were swept away, destroyed by 
communism, so to speak.

The breakdown of order and meaning in the arts accompanies the breakdown of order 
and meaning in society. It follows the prolonged refusal of the source of all 
goodness, order, truth, and meaning, which is God. You cannot throw out God 
indefinitely and expect to keep the consequences of God. The consequences will go 
with Him. If you throw out God, you are going to have the devil, and the devil is 
going to claim his rights. He will infiltrate, he will work his way in, and the old 
world will be destroyed.

## T.S. Eliot's "The Wasteland"

In literature, where is this breakdown quite graphically portrayed? T.S. Eliot. 
Specifically, his poem *The Wasteland*, published in 1922. T.S. Eliot was born and 
bred American, from St. Louis, then went and settled in Europe. *The Wasteland* is 
what it says it is. It is a new kind of poetry, kind of cubism in poetry, kind of 
12-tone music in poetry. It only bears a certain resemblance to any kind of poetry 
that has gone before, and that is in order to hold up the mirror to this dramatic 
breakdown. T.S. Eliot must have said to himself, "I can't portray the chaos that 
there is today by writing beautiful and orderly sonnets, just like the poets always 
used to write, in regular 14 lines, with regular lines, and with rhymes, and with 
rhythm. If I've got this chaos in front of me, then it's going to make chaos of the 
verse." And that is sort of what it is. Only once you study it, you can see there is 
a shape and a sense to it. He is trying to make shape of this chaos. This was 1922, 
years ago, and the world has staggered on since then.

Is the music of *The Sound of Music* 12-tone music? No, it is not. Does that mean 
it is orderly? You better not say so. What kind of order is *The Sound of Music*? 
It is schlock order, kitsch order, trash order. It is orderly, but in a superficial 
way. There is no real order behind it or beneath it. It is sentimental, sticky, 
slushy. It is not genuine.

## Cubism, Picasso, and the Jaded Bourgeoisie

Cubism was one of those schools of modern art, a little way before the First World 
War. There is a very famous picture by Picasso called *Les Demoiselles d'Avignon*. 
I believe the date is around 1907 or 1908. It is a picture of four or five young 
women with not very much clothing on, but it is not like any of the classical 
pictures. It is very influenced by cubism. The ladies are being cut up into sort of 
sharp geometrical shapes. There is something cold and geometrical. It is very 
effective and very modern. Is it beautiful? That is another question. Most painters 
in 1907, 1908, were still producing paintings in the normal classical objective 
style. Then here comes this dramatic, shocking, completely original new kind of 
presentation. That is the way art went.

Picasso once said something like, "I know what I do is trash, but it's what the 
people like. This is what the bourgeoisie like." It sells. Why does the middle class 
like this kind of thing which is going to destroy them? Because they do not want 
what would make demands of them to quit their selfish and comfortable way of life—
above all, selfish.

Perhaps there is a certain instinct for disorder in the bourgeoisie. They are 
refusing God, so they are bound to go towards disorder. Nobody can stand still. But 
why do they like Picasso, who is stabbing them and jabbing them all the time and 
telling them they are jerks? Why does the middle class like this avant-garde art? 
They are jaded. This avant-garde stuff which jabs them and stabs them gives them a 
feeling that they are alive. It is like somebody who has lost his sense of taste and 
needs sharp curry in order to feel any taste at all. That is why they like 
Stravinsky, Picasso, Stravinsky's *Rite of Spring* music. That is why a lot of 
these people like jazz in the United States. Why do white people go for this black 
music, like Elvis Presley and so on? Because the white way of life is grinding 
down. The white values—truth, decency, honor, God, religion, country—nobody really 
believes in them any longer. Whereas, you know, getting a feel like an animal, at 
least there is a bit of animal vitality. And of course, blacks are good at animal 
vitality. I am not saying it is all they are good at, but they are good at that. So 
the whites turn to the blacks to give them a sort of shot of life, so that they can 
start jerking back to life again. That is how degraded the whites have become.

## *Corruptio Optima Pessima*: The Degradation of the West

Why are the whites so degraded? The three-word Latin proverb answers this: 
*Corruptio optima pessima* – the corruption of the best is the worst. These people 
who once were the privileged carriers of Catholic civilization have gone godless, 
Christless, materialistic. They are being punished for their apostasy. They do not 
want to turn back to God. Then they will turn to all kinds of devils in order to 
continue to look for any kind of meaning in existence. And of course, rock music 
turns to the devils big time; Satanism is flooding back, and so on.

## The Mystical Meaning of the Heavenly City (Revelation 21)

### Verse 16: The City's Dimensions and Virtues

Alright, verse 16. The four-square is the four cardinal virtues. The length thereof 
is as great as the breadth; in other words, the four virtues are cultivated in a 
balanced, even way. There is no distortion. "He measured the city with a golden 
reed for 12,000 furlongs, so the length and the breadth were both equal." 12,000 is 
12 times 1,000. 12 is the doctrine of the apostles. 1,000 is perseverance. So 12,000 
furlongs represents all those men persevering in the faith. The length is the 
cardinal virtues.

Then we have "the length, and the height, and the breadth thereof are equal." These 
are the three theological virtues. The length is faith, connecting the long 
distance between creator and creature. Height is hope, lifting us to the heights. 
Breadth is dilative (D-I-L-A-T-I-V-E) charity. To dilate means to expand, to 
broaden, to open. Dilative charity means expansive charity; it expands the heart, 
broadens the heart to open it on God and on all men. So the length, the height, and 
the breadth are the three theological virtues.

### Verse 17: The Wall of Christ

"And he measured the wall thereof 144 cubits, the measure of a man, which is of an 
angel." The wall is Christ. The cubits are the works of Christ on Earth. 144 is 100, 
meaning purity of intention (I do not know why 100 is purity of intention); 40 is 
penance (the number of days in Lent, the number of days Our Lord was in the desert); 
and 4 is the cardinal virtues.

"It is the measure of man," meaning the measure that every man must seek to achieve 
if he wishes to be incorporated in Christ or go to Heaven. "Which is of an angel," 
because any man who makes it to Heaven will be replacing a fallen angel; he will be 
taking a place in an angelic hierarchy. However, notice Challoner's note: "The 
measure of man, i.e., according to the measure of men and used by the angel." That 
is a different understanding. You can see that it is not as though there is one and 
only one possible interpretation of the verses of the Apocalypse.

### Verse 18: Jasper Walls and a City of Golden Glass

Verse 18: "And the building of the wall thereof was of jasper stone, but the city 
itself pure gold, like the clear glass." The building of the wall, then Christ, out 
of jasper stone. Christ's humanity is through and through firm and green in the 
sense of flourishing, alive, a perpetual springtime of life, beauty, freshness, and 
vigor. But the city itself, pure gold like clear glass. The city is the mass of the 
elect, the saved souls, who are translucent, shining through with the love of God. 
The glass is the shining through, and the gold is the love of God. It is difficult 
for us to imagine a combination of golden glass. Gold is not transparent; glass is 
not golden. He is using human things to describe a heavenly vision. Gold is charity, 
and the glass is transparency, translucency (shining through, from Latin *trans* and 
*lucere*).

### Verses 19-20: The Precious Stone Foundations and Their Virtues

Verse 19: "And the foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with all manner 
of precious stones. The first foundation was jasper, the second sapphire, the third 
a chalcedony, the fourth an emerald," and then through to Verse 20, "the twelfth an 
amethyst." The list continues: "the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh 
chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth a topaz, the tenth a chrysoprasus, the 
eleventh a jacinth, the twelfth an amethyst."

Commentators assume the list means something. Literally, the precious stones are the 
beauty and variety of the heavenly city—variety of color, variety of shape, like a 
collection of jewels.
Mystically, "the foundations of the walled city were adorned with all manner of 
precious stones." The foundation is the patriarchs and apostles. The wall (which 
previously meant Christ) is here the wall of the Church: the doctors, bishops, and 
preachers who rest upon the patriarchs and apostles, like a wall rests on 
foundations. The precious stones are their virtues. These 12 stones represent 
virtues. This is the mystical meaning.

#### The First Four Stones: Faith, Hope, Charity, Virginity

Jasper is faith, dark green, because the virtues go out from the faith. Without 
faith, it is impossible to please God. The faith of Abraham is the basis of the 
vocation of the Israelites. The faith of Peter is the cornerstone of the New 
Testament. So, Abraham and Peter are at the basis of the Old Testament and the New 
Testament. Jasper is faith.

The sapphire, one of the four precious stones (as opposed to semi-precious, which 
are ruby, sapphire, emerald, diamond), is colored blue, sometimes called lapis 
lazuli. It represents hope, hope for a clear blue heaven.

The third stone is chalcedony, which is a variety of ruby, deep red in color, 
luminous in the dark. This represents charity. Charity is luminous in the dark in 
the sense that it seeks humility; it seeks to be in the dark, and it shines in 
humility.

The emerald is, of course, green: the green of a continual springtime, representing 
virginity. So, faith, hope, charity, virginity.

#### The Fifth Stone: Humility

Verse 20, the fifth stone is sardonyx or onyx, often with black and white stripes. 
This can represent those who think very lowly of themselves (black), but God thinks 
very highly of them (white). So the stripes represent humility. Or, the blackness 
of temptations and the whiteness of their resistance. So, black and white represents 
humility.

#### The Active Life (Continued)

Next, the next three stones are the active life: sardius, chrysolite, and beryl. And 
we will look at those tomorrow.

```
{
    "date": "26-04-1999"
}
```