Bishop Williamson deciphers excerpts from "The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion,"
a diabolical blueprint for world control, and interprets apocalyptic prophecies 
from the Book of Revelation, urging a return to Catholic faith as the sole defense 
against these unfolding spiritual battles.

# Bishop Williamson: The Protocols, the Apocalypse, and Divine Justice

Bishop Williamson presents excerpts from "The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion,"
explaining the outline of a deliberate plan to dismantle Christian states. He
details methods such as abolishing aristocracy, controlling the press, fomenting
economic crises, promoting liberalism and materialism, and systematically undermining
the clergy, all aimed at establishing a global super-government. 

His grace asserts that the only effective defense against this multifaceted agenda is a
steadfast return to the Catholic faith, explaining that God permits such forces to
act as a scourge when Catholics abandon their religious duties. He then transitions
to an exegesis of Revelation Chapter 17, interpreting the "great harlot" as a symbol
of infidelity to God and pervasive sensuality, and the "scarlet beast" as the devil
supporting these vices. 

Bishop Williamson elucidates how the apocalyptic imagery describes the world's deceptive 
allurements and its inherent, though often hidden, cruelty towards faithful Christians, 
while ultimately assuring that divine justice will prevail against these evils.

## Commentary on The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion

I promised you, I found these sheets of the Protocols, which contain a very brief 
extraction from the Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion.

### The Call of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity and the Undermining of States

"Our call of liberty, equality, and fraternity brought whole legions to our ranks
from all four corners of the world through our blind agents, and these legions
carried our banners with enthusiasm. In the meantime, these ideas were eating like
so many canker worms into the well-being of the Goyim and were destroying their
peace, quiet, and solidarity, thus ruining the foundations of states." The Goyim
are, of course, the cattle, the Gentiles. "As we shall see later on, it was this
action which brought about our triumph. Amongst other things, it gave us the
possibility of playing our master card, namely the abolition of privileges, in
other words, the existence of the Gentile aristocracy which was the only protection
nations and countries had against us. On the ruins of the natural and hereditary
aristocracy of the Goyim, we set up an aristocracy of our own founded upon wealth
of which we had control and upon science provided by our scholars."

### The Power of the Press

"The press in the hands of existing governments is a great power by which the
control of people's mind is obtained. It is in the press that the triumph of
freedom of speech finds its incarnation. But the Goyim states have not known how to
make use of this force, and it has fallen into our hands. Through the press, we have
obtained influence while remaining ourselves in the background. Thanks to the press,
we have accumulated gold, although it has cost us oceans of blood. But it has paid
us well, though we have sacrificed many of our own people."

### Exploitation of the Working Class and Economic Crises

"Nowadays, with the destruction of the aristocracy, the people have fallen into the
clutches of merciless profiteers who have laid a pitiless and cruel yoke upon the
necks of the workers. We intend to appear on the scene as though we were the
liberators of the worker from this oppression when we shall propose to him to join
the ranks of our fighting forces: socialists, anarchists, and communists. The
latter we always patronize, pretending to help them in accordance with the principle
of fraternity and the general interest of humanity evoked by our socialistic
masonry. Our strength lies in keeping the working man in perpetual want and misery.
We move the masses by making use of feelings of jealousy and hatred enkindled by
oppression and need. With their hands, we shall sweep aside all those who impede our
advance. This hatred will become still more acute thanks to an economic crisis which
will stop dealings on the exchanges and bring industry to a standstill. We will
create, by all the secret underhand methods known to us and with the help of gold,
which is all in our hands, a universal economic crisis whereby we shall throw upon
the streets whole mobs of workers simultaneously in all the countries of Europe.
These mobs will run with delight to shed the blood of those whom, in the simplicity
of their ignorance, they have envied from childhood and whose possessions they will
then be able to loot. Our possessions they will not touch because the moment of the
attack will be known to us and we will take measures to protect our interests."

### The Role of Gentile Freemasonry

"Gentile Freemasonry blindly serves as a screen for us and for our purposes, but the
plan of action of our force and even our headquarters remain perpetually unknown to
the world at large."

### Undermining Faith and Promoting Materialism

"Even liberty might be harmless and have its place in the economy of states without
injury to the well-being of peoples if it rested upon the foundation of faith in God,
upon the brotherhood of man, unconnected with the idea of equality, which is
negative by the very laws of creation. With such a faith as this, the people might
be governed by their parish rulers and would walk contentedly and humbly under the
guiding hand of their spiritual pastors, submitting to the dispositions of God upon
Earth. Hence, it is indispensable for us to undermine all faith, to tear out of the
minds of the Goyim the very idea of God and to replace it by arithmetical
calculations and material needs. In order to divert the minds of the Goyim from our
policy, it is essential that we should keep them occupied with trade and commerce.
Thus, all nations will be striving for their own advantage and in this worldwide
struggle will not notice their common enemy. But so that liberty may entirely
dislocate and ruin the Goyim communities, we must put industry on a speculative
basis. The result is, this will be that the wealth of the land extracted by industry
will not remain in the hands of the Goyim but will come through speculation into our
coffers. The struggle for supremacy and the unceasing speculations in business will
create a demoralized, selfish, and heartless society. Such a society will become
completely indifferent to and even disgusted with religion and politics. Lust of
gold will be their only guide and will become with them a veritable cult for the
sake of material pleasures which they can procure by its means."

### The Assault on Landed Aristocracy

"Then the hour will have arrived when the lower classes of the Goyim, not for noble
motive nor even for the sake of wealth, but purely and simply out of hatred for the
upper classes, will follow our lead against our rivals, the more intelligent amongst
the Goyim. The aristocracy of the Goyim as a political force is dead. We need not
take it into account. But as landed proprietors, they can still be dangerous to us
because their independence is secured thanks to their property. It is essential,
therefore, for us to deprive them of their land at whatever cost. To attain this
object, the best method is to force up rates and taxes, thus increasing the burdens
upon landed property. These measures will keep landowners in a state of humble and
unconditional submission."

### Promotion of Speculation and Luxury

"At the same time, we must give all possible protection to commerce and industry, but
above all, to speculation of which the principal role is to act as a counterpoise
to industry. In the absence of speculation, industry would multiply capital in
private hands and would serve to restore agriculture by freeing the land from
indebtedness to the land banks. What we seek to bring about is that industry should
drain the land of all its riches and that speculation should transfer into our hands
all the wealth of the world. Thus, all the Goyim will be thrown into the ranks of
the proletariat. Then the Goyim will bow down before us in order to obtain a
precarious right to exist. In order to ruin the industry of the Goyim and to help
speculation, we will encourage the desire for boundless luxury, which we have
already developed. We will raise wages, but this will not bring any advantage to the
workers, for at the same time, we will raise the prices of the first necessities of
life. We will also artfully undermine the basis of production by sowing the seeds of
anarchy amongst the workmen."

### Demonstrating Power through Terror and Liberalism

"In order to prove that all the Goyim governments of Europe are subject to us, we
will show our power to one of them by means of crimes and violence. That is to say,
by a reign of terror. And in case they all rise against us, we will respond with
American, Chinese, or Japanese guns. When we introduce the poison of liberalism into
the state organism, its whole political complexion underwent a change. States have
been seized with a mortal illness, blood poisoning. There remains only to wait the
end of their agony. What prompted us to adopt such a line of action if it was not
because we could not, as a scattered race, attain our object by direct means, but
only by circumvention? This was the real cause and origin of our organization of
masonry, which those Goyim cattle do not fathom, and the aims of which they do not
even suspect. They are attracted by us into the show army of masonic lodges in order
to throw dust in the eyes of their fellows."

### Control and Manipulation of Masonic Lodges

"When we at last definitely come into our kingdom, we shall make it our task to see
that against us such things as plots no longer exist. Every kind of new institution
of anything like a secret society under us will also be punished with death. Those
of them which are now in existence unknown to us, serve us, and have served us.
Those we shall disband and send into exile to continents far removed from Europe. In
this way, we shall proceed with those Goyim masons who know too much. Such of these
as we may for some reason spare will be kept in constant fear of exile. We shall
promulgate a law making all former members of secret societies liable to exile from
Europe. Meantime, however, until we come into our kingdom, we shall act in the
contrary way. We shall create and multiply masonic lodges in all the countries of
the world, absorb into them all who may become or are prominent in public activity.
For in these lodges we shall find our principal intelligence offices and means of
influence. All these lodges we shall bring under one central administration known to
us alone, and to all others absolutely unknown, which will be composed of our
learned elders. The lodges will have their representatives who will serve to screen
the above-mentioned administration of masonry and from whom will issue the watchword
and program. In these lodges, we shall tie the knot which binds together all
revolutionary and liberal elements. The most secret political plots will be made
known to us and will fall under our guiding hands on the very day of their
conception. The class of people who most willingly enter into secret societies are
those who live by their wits, careerists, and in general people mostly like-minded
with whom we should have no difficulty in dealing and in using to wind up the
mechanism of the machine devised by us. It is natural that we and no others should
lead masonic activities for we know where we are going. We know the final goal of
every form of activity whereas the Goyim have knowledge of nothing. The Goyim enter
the lodges out of curiosity or in the hope by means of the lodges to get a nibble at
the public pie, and some of them in order to obtain a hearing before the public for
their impracticable and groundless fantasies. They thirst for success and applause
of which we are remarkably generous. And the reason why we give them this success is
to make use of the high conceit of themselves to which it gives birth."

### Distraction and Discrediting Clergy

"In order to keep the Goyim from discovering for themselves any new line of action
in politics, we will also distract them with amusements, games, pastimes, passions,
people's palaces and so on. Soon we shall start advertising in the press, inviting
people to enter for various competitions in art, in sport of all kinds. These
interests will finally turn away their minds from questions in which we should find
ourselves compelled to oppose them. We have taken great care to discredit the clergy
of the Goyim in the eyes of the people, and thus we have succeeded in ruining their
mission, which could have been very much in our way. The influence of the clergy on
the people is lessening day by day. Today, freedom of conscience prevails everywhere
and now only a few years divide us from the time when Christianity will finally
crumble away. We will confine the clergy and their teachings to such a small part in
life, and their influence will be made so uncongenial to the populace that their
teachings will have the opposite effect to that which they formerly had."

That's from an old edition. It's wondrously... perhaps you can find a different
wording. "We have long past taken care to discredit the priesthood of the Goyim and
thereby to ruin their mission on Earth, which in these days might still be a great
hindrance to us. Day by day, its influence on the peoples of the world is falling
lower. Freedom of conscience has been declared everywhere so that now only years
divide us from the moment of the complete wrecking of their Christian religion. As
to other religions, we shall have still less difficulty in dealing with them, but it
would be premature to speak of this now. We shall set clericalism and clericals into
such narrow frames as to make their influence move in contrary proportion to its
former progress."

### Destruction of the Papal Court and Rise of a Universal Patriarch

"When the time comes finally to destroy the papal court, the finger of an invisible
hand will point the nations toward this court. When, however, the nations fling
themselves upon it, we shall come forward in the guise of its defenders, as if to
save excessive bloodshed. By this diversion, we shall penetrate to the very bowels
of the papal court and be sure that we shall never come out again until we have
gnawed through the entire strength of this place. The king of the Jews will be the
real pope of the universe, the patriarch of an international church. But in the
meantime, while we are re-educating youth in new traditional religions, and
afterwards in ours, we shall not overtly lay a finger on existing churches, but we
shall fight against them by criticism calculated to produce schism."

### Control through Media and Surveillance

"In general then, our contemporary press will continue to convict state affairs,
religions, incapacities of the Goyim, always using the most unprincipled expressions
in order by every means to lower their prestige in the manner which can only be
practiced by the genius of our gifted pride."

"Our kingdom will be an apology of the divinity of Vishnu in which is found its
personification, the 100-armed arm. In our hundred hands will be, one in each, the
springs of the machinery of social life. We shall see everything without the aid of
official police, which in that scope of its rights, which we elaborated for the use
of the Goyim, hinders governments from seeing. In our program, one third of our
subjects will keep the rest under observation from a sense of duty on the principle
of volunteer service to the state." That's spying in the communist countries. "It
will then be no disgrace to be a spy and informer, but a merit. Unfounded
denunciations, however, will be cruelly punished, that there may be no development
of abuses of this right." And so on.

### Emasculation of Universities and Control of Education

He talks of the emasculation of the universities. "In order to affect the
destruction of all collective forces except ours, we shall emasculate the first
stage of collectivism, the universities, by re-educating them in a new direction.
Their officials and professors will be prepared for their business by detailed
secret programs of action from which they will not with immunity diverge, not by one
iota. They will be appointed with a special precaution and will be so placed as to
be wholly dependent upon the government. We shall exclude from the course of
instruction, state law, as also all that concerns the political question. These
subjects will be taught to a few dozens of persons, chosen for their preeminent
capacities from among the number of the initiated."

"The universities must no longer send out from their halls milksops concocting plans
for a constitution, like a comedy or a tragedy, busying themselves with questions
of policy in which even their own fathers never had any power of thought. The
ill-guided acquaintance of a large number of persons with questions of polity
creates utopian dreamers and bad subjects, as you can see for yourselves from the
example of the universal education in this direction of the Goyim. We must introduce
into their education all those principles which have so brilliantly broken up their
order, principles of liberalism. But when we are in power, we shall remove every
kind of disturbing subject from the course of education and shall make out of the
youth, children obedient to authority, loving him who rules as the support and hope
of peace and quiet. Classicism, as also any form of study of ancient history, in
which there are more bad than good examples, we shall replace with a study of the
program of the future. We shall erase from the memory of men all facts of previous
centuries which are undesirable to us, and leave only those which depict all the
errors of the governments of the Goyim. The study of practical life, of the
obligations of order, of the relations of people one to another, of avoiding bad and
selfish examples which spread the infection of evil, and similar questions of an
educative nature will stand in the forefront of the teaching program, which will be
drawn up on a separate plan for each calling or state of life, in no way
generalizing the teaching."

"Each state of life must be trained within strict limits corresponding to its
destination and work in life. The occasional genius has always managed and always
will manage to slip through into other states of life, but it is the most perfect
folly, for the sake of this rare occasional genius, to let through into ranks
foreign to them the untalented who thus rob of their places those who belong to
those ranks by birth or employment. You know yourselves in what all this has ended
for the Goyim who allowed this crying absurdity."

### Manipulation of Public Opinion and Discouraging Initiative

"We shall assume to ourselves the liberal characterizing of all parties, of all
directions, and we shall give that characterization a voice in orators who will
speak so much that they will exhaust the patience of their hearers and produce a
horror of oratory."

"In order to put public opinion into our hands, we must bring it into a state of
bewilderment, by giving expression from all sides to so many contradictory opinions,
and for such length of time, as will suffice to make the Goyim lose their heads in
the labyrinth, and come to see that the best thing is to have no opinion of any kind
in matters political, which is not given to the public to understand, because they
are understood only by him who guides the public. This is the first secret. The
second secret requisite for the success of our government is the following: to
multiply to such an extent national failings, habits, passions, conditions of civil
life that it will be impossible for anyone to know where he is in the resulting
chaos, so that the people in consequence will fail to understand one another. This
measure will also serve us in another way, namely to sow discord in all parties, to
dislocate all collective forces which are still unwilling to submit to us, and to
discourage any kind of personal initiative which might in any degree hinder our
affair. There is nothing more dangerous than personal initiative. If it has genius
behind it, such an initiative can do more than can be done by millions of people,
among whom we have sown discord. We must so direct the education of the Goyim
communities that whenever they come upon a matter requiring initiative, they may
drop their hands in despairing impotency. The strain which results from freedom of
action saps the forces when it meets with the freedom of another. From this
collision arise grave moral shocks, disenchantments, failures."

### The Super-Government: United Nations

"By all these means, we shall so wear down the Goyim that they will be compelled to
offer us international power of a nature that, by its position, will enable us
without any violence gradually to absorb all the state forces of the world and to
form a super government. In place of the rulers of today, we shall set up a bogey
which will be called the super government administration. Its hands will reach out
in all directions like nippers, and its organization will be of such colossal
dimensions that it cannot fail to subdue all the nations of the world." That's the
United Nations. Pretty. Very pretty. I recommend it. Its discovery at the beginning
of this century, or the end of the last century to the beginning of this century,
was a gift of God. The Lord God was saying to Christian civilization, "Look, get
your act together. This is what is going on."

## The Only Defense: The Catholic Faith

How can the Goyim defend themselves against this? Anybody? You know my answer to
that. By the Catholic faith, that is the only defense. That is why God allows this.
God preserves these people. They have the mark of Cain upon them, and they have the
curse upon them. But God preserves them because he uses them as a scourge every time
the Gentiles turn away from, or abandon the faith. So, or every time Catholics
abandon the faith. It is not a question of Gentiles; it is a question of Catholics.
To return the Catholics back to the faith. This creature is always ready to strike
like a snake, waiting for somebody to step out too far within reach, so that it can
bite. But if people have the faith, this does not take. This diabolical cunning,
this satanic knowledge of human nature, diabolic cunning, cannot work. That is how
it was in the Middle Ages when these people were scheming all of this in their
ghettos. They were waiting, waiting, waiting to get out of the ghettos in order to
start this.

### Historical Moments: Reformation and French Revolution

What was the decisive moment for getting out of the ghetto? Darwin? Blessing. Yes,
that was pretty important. Yes. For getting out of the ghetto, you might be right.
And then for being, after getting out of the ghetto, to be emancipated? The French
Revolution. Yeah. There are those two events. Oh, and the Protestant Reformation.
The Reformation, the French Revolution. Those are the two events. Immediately after
the French Revolution, once they were emancipated in civil society, they immediately
took over. They rapidly took over government, finance, industry, money, you name it.
They rapidly took over because the Goyim were blind. What were the Goyim by then
thinking about these people, Hoffman? When the Goyim emancipated these people, what
did they think? What did the Goyim think about themselves? "I am liberal. I am
enlightened. I am superior to my ancestors. They were unjust to these poor,
downtrodden, oppressed people. I am giving them their rights equal with ourselves."
Huh? It is exactly what they were so proud and puffed up that they were more liberal,
and that they were more generous, and that they were at last looking after these
poor, oppressed, downtrodden people. Victims of antisemitism for so many years. "Oh.
Ooh. Oh, how superior we liberals are."

### Benjamin Franklin's Warning

Benjamin Franklin, a famous quotation of Benjamin Franklin to, I think, the
Constitutional Convention. He said, "Gentlemen, if you do not stop these people
coming into the republic, within 200 years they will have completely taken it over."
Does anybody know that quotation? Benjamin Franklin. Of course, you do not read it
in any history books, but that is what he said. He said, "If you do not, they will
take over and our sons will not have a penny to put to their names. Our grandsons
will not have a penny to their names." Exactly right. Yeah. So, this is still the
Book of the Apocalypse. This is...

## Exegesis of Revelation Chapter 17

And he spoke with me. This angel spoke with John in intimacy because of John's
purity. And he said, "Come, I will show thee the damnation of the great whore, who
sitteth upon many waters." "Come." In other words, retire within thy soul. If an
angel says come, it is retire within thy soul. Pray in order to see the inner truth.
The great harlot, H-A-R-L-O-T, is, in the moral sense, infidelity to God. In the
allegorical sense, the Antichrist and his allies. I will show you the damnation of
the great harlot who sitteth upon many waters, abundant waters. Abundant waters are
the peoples. For instance, the kings and the inhabitants of the earth, verse two.
The abundant waters are the peoples, kings and inhabitants of the earth.

### The Great Harlot and the Kings of the Earth (Verse 2)

Verse two, "With whom the kings of the earth committed fornication, and those who
inhabit the earth are become drunk from the wine of prostitution." The Scarlet Woman
with whom the kings of the earth have fornicated and the dwellers of the earth have
become drunk. The dwellers of the earth are again earthly people who say we have
here a lasting city. We do not seek one that is to come, materialists. Compare
Hebrews chapter 13, verse 14. St. Paul says, "We have not here a lasting city. We
seek one that is to come." The inhabitants of the earth here are those who settle
down contentedly in this life as though there is no other, who only want to live for
this life. Materialists again, you could call it. So the inhabitants of earth in
verse two are the materialists. The materialists have grown drunk with the wine of
her prostitution. The wine is the attractiveness of creatures, the sweet
attractiveness of creatures, effacing the four last things: heaven, hell, death,
judgment. So the wine means the attractiveness of creatures wiping out of men's
minds the four last things.

### The Woman on the Scarlet Beast (Verse 3)

Verse three, "And the angel took me away in spirit into the desert, and I saw a
woman sitting upon a scarlet-colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven
heads and ten horns." "And he took me away in spirit into the desert." Spirit is
ecstasy, and the desert is here the wasteland of sin. The angel took me away in
ecstasy into the wasteland of sin. "And I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet beast,
sitting upon a scarlet-colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads
and ten horns." The woman represents sensuality. Sensuality, whereas the spiritual
life is virile; softness and sensuality are materialism, whereas the spiritual life
is virile. The beast is the devil who carries sensuality slowly but surely to hell.
The beast is red. A scarlet-colored beast is his criminality. The beast is
criminal, bloody, criminal. The seven heads are the capital sins, the seven capital
sins. A scarlet-colored beast full of names of blasphemy having seven heads and ten
horns. Seven heads are the capital sins, and ten horns are pride.

### The Woman's Attire and the Golden Cup (Verse 4)

Verse four, "And the woman was clothed round about with purple and scarlet and gilt
with gold and precious stones and pearls having a golden cup in her hand full of the
abomination and filthiness of her fornication." The woman was clothed round about
with purple and scarlet. Purple is the royalty of sensuality. She is the queen of
this world. The royalty of sensuality. Sensuality is the queen of this world. The
scarlet lining: the beast is scarlet, and then the lining of the woman's coat is
scarlet. The scarlet lining is the hidden cruelty of sensuality. Sensuality looks
all soft and nice outside but inside it is cruel, like the girl getting an abortion.
The inner cruelty of sensuality, the scarlet lining. She is decked in gold. She is
gilt with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full
of the abomination and filthiness of her fornication. Decked in gold is her outer
appearance of wisdom and charity. Precious stones and pearls: the precious stone is
Christ hypocritically assumed. The precious stone is a hypocritical wearing or
putting on of Christ, a hypocritical show of Christ. And the pearls are apparent
virtues. So there is a show of Christianity. Having a golden cup in her hand full of
the abomination and filthiness of her fornication. The golden cup is divine truth.
But in her hand, that truth is misinterpreted. In her hand, that divine truth is
misinterpreted and mishandled, so that out comes only her own filth, her own muck
and filth.

### Mystery: Babylon the Great (Verse 5)

Verse five, "And on her forehead, a name was written, a mystery, 'Babylon the Great,
the Mother of the Fornications and the Abominations of the Earth.'" On her forehead
means that her wickedness is clear to see for all who see with the eyes of faith. On
her forehead means that her real inner wickedness is clear to see to all with the
eyes of faith. On her forehead is written, "Mystery." Mystery, that same wickedness
is unintelligible to materialists, to worldlings, people of the world. Babylon is
the city of evil raised by human pride against the City of God, mothering all kinds
of wickedness and sin. Mother of fornications, she is mothering, Babylon is
mothering all kinds of wickedness and sin.

### Drunk with the Blood of Saints (Verse 6)

Verse six. "And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints and with the
blood of the martyrs of Jesus, and I wondered when I had seen her with great
admiration." "But I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints." Drunk shows
the woman's wild—it shows the wild nature of the world for Christians. The wild
hatred of the world of sensuality, of materialism for true Christians. "And when I
had seen her, I wondered with a great admiration." Admiration means rather
astonishment than approval, the old use of admiration. John is astonished at the
success and serenity of the harlot, the Scarlet Woman. John is astonished at the
success and serenity of the harlot. (laughs)

### The Angel's Explanation and Divine Justice (Verse 7)

"And the angel said to me, 'Why didst thou wonder? I will tell thee the mystery of
the woman and of the beast which carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and ten
horns.'" Why? What are you wondering at, says the angel. John, why should John, why
is John surprised? He knows the wickedness of man and the justice of God. Why should
John be surprised that the Scarlet Woman looks so successful and serene, just like
Clinton? Why? Why be so surprised at somebody like Clinton? You know how wicked men
are. Oh, yeah, but I am longing for him to get his comeuppance. Do not worry. Do not
worry. God is going to get him. Vengeance is mine, I will repay. Good, good, good.
Yes, that is true. That is right. Where do you, where would you look for that?
Vengeance is mine, I will repay? Romans 12. Well done. Yes, it is in Romans 12, that
is right. Going back to, of course, it is Deuteronomy. Romans 12, vengeance is mine,
I will repay. Romans 12. It is a very important thing to remember today. Otherwise,
you could look at the scene today and really go crazy. Vengeance is mine, I will
repay. Deuteronomy 32 verse 35. Matthew 5:39. Deuteronomy 32 verse 35. Hebrews 10
verse 30. So it is originally from Deuteronomy. "Revenge not yourselves, my dearly
beloved, give place unto wrath, for it is written, 'Revenge is mine, I will repay,'
saith the Lord." The Psalms constantly say the same thing. Notice the Psalms. And
you know, you and I might just skim through them, making perfunctory noises
(Bishop Williamson imitates a dismissive reading), but look at what it is saying.
Look at what it is saying: the bad guys are going to get it. (laughs) The good guys
are going to... It is constant. The good guys are going to be rewarded, and the bad
guys are going to get it. Read it. Yes, it is there. Hey. (laughs)


```
{
    "date": "23-02-1999"
}
```