Bishop Williamson delves into Apocalypse Chapter 1, interpreting St. John's vision 
of Christ's majesty, the symbolism of the seven churches, and the spiritual roles 
within the Church.

# Apocalypse 1: Christ's Glory and the Seven Churches

Bishop Williamson explains that Apocalypse Chapter 1 reveals Jesus Christ as the 
faithful witness and King, who establishes a spiritual priesthood for believers. He 
says Christ's second coming will be with clouds, literal or symbolic of the 
apostles, and that the vision of one 'like the Son of Man' amidst seven golden 
candlesticks (the churches) signifies Christ's presence and glory. 

Bishop Williamson interprets the details of this figure, like the two-edged sword (God's Word) 
and seven stars (bishops), as conveying deep spiritual truths about 
Christ, the Church, and its leadership, which St. John is commanded to record.

## Commentary on Apocalypse Chapter 1

## The Doctrinal Heart: Christ the King and Priest (Apocalypse 1:5-6)

Chapter one, verse six. Actually, we're just, we've centered this in verse five.
"Faithful witness," because our Lord witnessed to His Father, and He will judge
precisely and faithfully at the end of the world. He is, our Lord is the
firstborn of the dead. Jesus Christ is the firstborn of the dead, the first
begotten of the dead. I.e., the first to rise to life eternal. 1 Corinthians 15,
verse 20. Colossians 1, verse 18. References to the first born from the dead.
"The prince of the kings of the earth, who hath loved us and washed us from our
sins in His own blood. And hath made us a kingdom and priests to God and His
Father, to Him be glory in empire forever and ever, amen."

Verses five and six are the doctrinal basis of all the Apocalypse. It's the
heart of the whole of the book. Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, risen from
the dead, King of Kings, loved us, redeemed us, made us a kingdom, priests of
heaven, to Him glory in empire forever and ever. That's what Apocalypse is all
about.

Verse six, "He hath made us a kingdom." A kingdom, because Christ has destroyed
the empire of the devil in our souls, and replaced it with His own. This is the
kingdom of heaven; "the kingdom of heaven is within you." "The kingdom of heaven
is at hand." The kingdom of heaven is like unto the gospel. "He hath made us a
kingdom," the kingdom of Christ, because He's destroyed the empire of the devil
in our souls, He's replaced it with His own.

### The Priesthood of the Faithful

And He's made us priests, to God and His Father. What's the right expression of
that? There's the ministerial priesthood and the priesthood of the faithful. Yes,
the priesthood of the faithful. He hath made us priests of the interior
priesthood by baptism, not by ordination. Priests in the same sense in which
Peter talks about in his first epistle. The reference is very likely here...
First Epistle of Peter, "He hath made us..."

Why is every Catholic a priest in heaven? In what sense is every Catholic a
priest in heaven? What's the essence of a priest? A sacrifice. Yes, that's
right. What sacrifice is every Catholic offering in heaven? A sacrifice of
praise, you may say. A sacrifice of praise and glory. So every Catholic in
heaven is offering a sacrifice of praise and glory to God, so priests in that
broader sense, to be strictly distinguished from the ministerial priesthood. But
the modernists, of course, fool around with that distinction.

Priests by baptism, the priesthood of souls offering a sacrifice of prayer and
good works. The interior priesthood of souls offering a sacrifice of prayer and
good works on the inner altar of their hearts. John 4:23, "God is Spirit and will
be adored in spirit." "The hour cometh and now is when the true adorer shall
adore the Father in spirit and in truth, for the Father also seeketh such to
adore Him. God is spirit and if they adore Him, they must adore Him in spirit
and in truth." So the priests, by the interior priesthood, souls offering a
sacrifice of prayer and good works on the inner altar of their hearts.

The distinction here is between the interior priesthood and the exterior
priesthood: the priesthood by baptism, the priesthood by ordination. The
priesthood of the faithful, the ministerial priesthood. It's a distinction which
is perfectly clear, but the modernists fool around with it. Priesthood by
baptism versus priesthood by priestly ordination. That's the ministerial
priesthood. The priesthood of the faithful is not priesthood in the strict
sense, but an analogous sense. This equates to interior priests and exterior
priests. Priesthood in the heart, priesthood by hands, if you like. Priesthood
by hands are anointed and offer the sacrifice. Priesthood of the heart,
priesthood of the hands.

Someone mentioned laity being considered priests according to Aaron because of
their work for him. There's absolutely nothing to that. Again, it's purely
comparison, designed to blur the distinction. If you say that the faithful are
priests according to the order of Aaron, you're getting... The order of Aaron
was quite different from the laity. How did a priest become a priest according
to the order of Aaron? They were born into it. If you were born into the family
of Aaron in the Tribe of Levi, every male child was a priest. And then every
Levite outside the order of Aaron was a Levite; he was a deacon without being a
priest. So it was by birth.

First Peter the Apostle, 1 Peter 2:5: "Be you also as living stones built up a
special house, a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ." That's the interior priesthood, spiritual sacrifices. The
ordained priest offers up physical sacrifices: the host and the wine,
consecrated, the body and blood, but they're physical. The priesthood of the
faithful is a spiritual priesthood. Be careful. That's a classic boobytrap used
by Modernists.

## The Second Coming Announced (Apocalypse 1:7)

Verse seven. "Behold, he cometh with the clouds and every eye shall see him and
they also that pierced him and all the tribes of the earth shall bewail
themselves because of him. Even so. Amen."

"Behold he comes with clouds..." This is of course Our Lord. "With clouds..."
Literally, as in Acts 1:9-11, Our Lord at his ascension speaking of His second
coming. "You will behold the Son of Man on the clouds." Either literally,
mystically, or spiritually, the clouds are the apostles. In Africa, it seems
that a chief could very well understand there being statues in a Catholic church
because the head man had to have counselors or adjutants around him. It was
understandable that the head man should have sidekicks; therefore, the
Protestants got it wrong. But the Catholics who have statues of saints around
the altar have got it right. Clouds around the principal glory. So, He will come
in clouds, the apostles.

"And every eye will see him, and they too that have pierced him and all the
tribes of the earth shall wail." All the tribes of the earth, the tribes are the
slaves of earthly goods, who will be wailing. The bad guys will be sorry. The
good guys will rejoice. So these are the bad guys. The tribes are the slaves of
earthly goods. "Shall bewail themselves because of him." This is reference to
the Second Coming. The bad guys will lament. "Even so. Amen." In Hebrew, *etsem*,
amen. Greek and Hebrew. *Etsem* Greek, *amen* Hebrew. The Apocalypse is for
Gentile and Jew. *Etsem* Gentile, *amen* Jew. In other words, the Apocalypse is
for everybody.

## The Almighty: Alpha and Omega (Apocalypse 1:8)

"I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, saith the Lord God, who is and
who was and who is to come, the Almighty." Alpha and omega, the first and last
letters of the Greek alphabet. "The beginning and the end," saith the Lord God.
"Who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty." Just as the alphabet
contains all human science, so God is omniscient. So "I am the Alpha, the Omega"
means "I know everything that you can write down with letters of the alphabet."
Everything that the alphabet contains, and that's all knowledge, because all
knowledge will be written down with letters of the alphabet. "All knowledge, I
possess. I am omniscient."

## The Introductory Vision: John on Patmos (Apocalypse 1:9-11)

We come on to the introductory vision, verses 9 to 19, the end of chapter 1.
"I, John, your brother, and your share and part in tribulation, and in the
Kingdom, and suffering in Christ Jesus, was in the island which is called Patmos
on account of the Word of God." He got exiled there because he was preaching. He
was doing his job as Bishop of Ephesus. "On account of the Word of God, and for
the testimony of Jesus." "I testified to Jesus being God."

Verse 10, "I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day. I was in ecstasy on Sunday."
"In the Spirit." That's an expression we've already seen. "In ecstasy on
Sunday." "And I heard behind me a great voice like of a trumpet saying, 'What
you see, write down in a book and send it to the seven churches," which are in
Asia: one Ephesus, two Smyrna, three Pergamum, four Thyatira, five Sardis, six
Philadelphia, seven Laodicea." So, a trumpet to get his attention. "Saying,
'What you see, write it down in a book and send it.'" Saint John is being told
to put what he will see in writing, and then send it to the churches. This verse
is why they say the immediate addressee of the Apocalypse is the seven churches
of Asia Minor. The mediate addressee is the whole Church.

Someone asked if this was due to his Gospel. It might be, but more likely, the
Gospel is simply part of his whole ministry. The Romans probably didn't bother
with what he wrote, but they did bother with his setting up this Christian
church in Ephesus. So probably his whole ministry.

## The Vision of the Son of Man (Apocalypse 1:12-16)

"I was in ecstasy on Sunday. I heard behind me a great voice as of a trumpet,
saying, 'What you see, write down in a book. Send it to the seven churches.' And
I turned around in order to see the voice." That's a bit strange, but you know
what he means. "I turned around to see the voice that spoke with me, and on
turning, I saw seven golden candlesticks."

### Seven Golden Candlesticks (Verse 12)

Gold is always charity. Heresy is tinsel in comparison. Rinky-dink tin. Whereas
charity is gold. Candlesticks are the church. A candlestick is a church because
it carries Christ, the light of the world. As a candlestick carries a candle, so
the light of the world is carried by the churches. It's a very interesting
comparison: Christ is to churches as light to candlesticks. Interesting because
the churches are numerous; Christ is one. Candlesticks are numerous; candles are
numerous, but light is, in a sense, one. You've got a different candle in each
candlestick, but the light is always light.

Someone once asked Dr. Samuel Johnson to define light. He said, "Nobody can
define it. Everybody knows what it is." Dr. Samuel Johnson wrote a dictionary.
He was an Englishman who didn't like Scotland very much. He said, "The best
sight any Scotsman can ever see is the front of England as he's crossing
southwards." He wrote a dictionary with various things. For example, oats: "Oats
are a feed that the English give to their horses and that Scotsmen eat by
themselves." He was a Tory, an outstanding Tory. He should have been a Catholic,
but I don't think he ever did convert. I would guess he died about 1780, born
about 1710. He said, "He who hates London, hates life." He was a character. He
hated Whigs, the descendants of the Puritans and forefathers of the Liberals.
The line went from Puritans to Rationalists, who in politics were Whigs, who
turned into Liberals. The opponents were Tories. Boswell's Life of Johnson
contains many of his sayings. Towards the end of his days, he knew an Italian
abbot of a Benedictine abbey. I don't know if he converted, but he knew what the
modern world was up to.

How did we get on to Johnson? His definition of light. Yes, that's it. Light.
Everyone knows what it is, but nobody can define it. Somebody once told him,
Berkeley, the philosopher, says that we get our senses... Dr. Johnson went up to
a big stone, gave it a big kick and said, "Thus do I refute Berkeley." Common
sense. On predestination, in the Calvinist sense, he said, "All argument is for
it, all experience is against it." There's some truth in that. It's a man with
some good sense speaking.

So the candlesticks all carry one light. They carry a lot of little lights, and
yet all those lights make one light. The same, the churches each carry their own
little light and yet all of those lights are the one light which is Christ.
Therefore the candlesticks are the churches, carrying Christ the light of the
world. Gold is charity. And seven candlesticks... Seven. Well, of course seven
is the number... He's picked seven churches, but it's also the number of the
sacraments, the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, the virtues, the works of corporal and
spiritual mercy. All of those are sevens. And he's picked seven churches which
stands for universal. Undoubtedly there were other cities with churches in Asia
Minor, undoubtedly they also needed letters, but those seven churches will stand
for them all. So seven is universal.

### One Like the Son of Man (Verse 13)

Verse 13, "And in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, one like to the
Son of Man." In the midst of the candlesticks, Christ is in his churches, Christ
is within his churches. One like to the Son of Man. "Like." There's a literal
meaning and a mystical meaning. Literally, some angel is standing in for Christ.
John is not actually seeing Jesus Christ; he's seeing an angel who's standing in
or representing Christ. So one like to the Son of Man. Mystical meaning: the
risen Christ is different. Now John is seeing the risen Christ who's like the
Christ on Earth, but not exactly. Obviously the wounds are shining brilliantly.

"Clothed with a garment down to the feet." The tunic of the Jewish high priest
stands for his priesthood. From head to foot stands for charity. It's a garment
like that of the high priest, and it symbolizes the charity of Christ from head
to foot. This garment signifies both His charity and His priesthood.

"And girt about the paps with a golden girdle." That's the chest. Again,
mortification of concupiscence. The New Testament mortification even of desires,
the heart. It's mortifying the heart, the movements of the heart. In the Old
Testament you are not allowed to act. In the New Testament you're not allowed to
desire. So here is girt about the chest, standing for the chastity of desires as
well as action.

### Divine Attributes (Verse 14-16)

"And His head and His hairs were white as white wool and as snow and His eyes
were as a flame of fire." The head is wisdom. White stands for divinity, for
eternity. They were as white as washed wool. The wool is soft, clean and warm
thoughts. And like snow. The snow stands for icy resistance to the devil. "His
eyes were as a flame of fire." The divine eyes purify and at the same time
enflame with love. "I am come to cast fire on the earth, and what will I but
that it be kindled?" Luke 12:49. The fire of charity, always. The divine eyes
purify and enflame with love. They burn up impurities.

Verse 15, "And His feet like unto fine brass as in a burning furnace and His
voice as the sound of many waters." Fine brass stands for strength and
stability. "His feet like unto fine brass." Strength and stability. The burning
furnace is the Passion. He was strong and stable through all His terrible
Passion. "His voice as the sound of many waters." Many waters are the worldwide
flood of truth that came with our Lord. When our Lord took flesh, the truth
began to flood through the world. Various heresies have dammed up the floodwaters
of truth, but those floodwaters kept breaking out again. Now in our own time, it
looks as though Christ is allowing his enemies almost to shut the truth down. But
if you cast your mind back over 20 centuries, it's clear that the truth that our
Lord brought did flood through the world.

Verse 16, "And he had in his right hand seven stars, and from his mouth came out
a sharp two-edged sword, and his face was as the sun shineth in his power." "He
had in his right hand seven stars." In his right hand, in the hand of Christ to
lead to Christ. The stars are bishops. In the beginning of chapter two you'll
see, "Unto the angel of the Church of Ephesus write..." and that is actually the
bishop of the Church of Ephesus. The angel is the bishop, the star is the
bishop. Spiritual stars to shine in the darkness of the world. Like stars shine
in darkness, so the bishops must shine in the world.

He quoted William Wordsworth's Lucy poems: "She dwelt amidst untrodden ways...
Or like a star when only one is shining in the sky." Wordsworth (1770-1850) was
initially enthusiastic about the French Revolution but grew wiser. His early
poems are very clear and simple. The star shining in the darkness is meant to be
a bishop. The stars represent bishops because they shine out in the darkness with
the brilliance of the Gospel, not their own brilliance.

"And from his mouth came out a sharp two-edged sword." The sword is the word of
God, with the power of God. "Sharp" means it's powerful. "Two-edged" because it
has a quite different power upon the good and upon the bad. The sword makes the
good feel good about themselves, but it makes the bad feel bad about themselves.
That's why it's two-edged.

"And his face was as the sun shineth in his power." The face of the one like the
son of man shines out in strength, like the Transfiguration (Matthew 17). The
sun in its strength, the sun at noon, in full brilliance. Compare Matthew
17:1-6. Matthew compares the appearance of our Lord to snow and the sun. Souls
that actually see the Mother of God or our Lord say that the sun and the snow
are very poor comparisons; it's so brilliant.

## John's Reaction and Christ's Assurance (Apocalypse 1:17-19)

Verse 17. "And when I had seen him, I fell at his feet as dead." As though I
were dead. There are numerous cases in the Old Testament like that: Daniel 10:8;
Genesis 17:3 (Abraham); 18:27 (likely Abraham); Exodus 33:20 (likely Moses).
Most people are filled with fear when an angel or such vision appears. "As if
dead." In other words, dead to the world on seeing God. Read 2 Corinthians 6:9.

"And he laid his right hand upon me saying, 'Fear not, I am the first and the
last.'" This is still Our Lord, or the angel standing in for Our Lord. "I am the
first and the last." I am the highest of creatures, treated as the lowest.
That's one interpretation for the God-man in his humanity. In his divinity, the
first and the last is obviously each end of eternity.

Verse 18, "And alive, and was dead, and behold I'm living forever and ever and I
have the keys of death and of hell." Obviously, our Lord in his humanity, for
whom the angel is standing in, so that Saint John understands clearly that it's
as if our Lord himself was speaking.

Verse 19, "Write therefore the things which thou hast seen and which are and
which must be done hereafter." Write the past life of Jesus, the present
tribulations of the church, the future coming of the Antichrist, et cetera. Put
down in this book the past, the present, and the future.

## The Mystery Explained (Apocalypse 1:20)

Verse 20. "The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand,
and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven
churches." That's the bishops. *Angelos* means messenger, the outstanding
messengers of each of the churches, which are the bishops. "And the seven
candlesticks are the seven churches."

Notice that verse clearly gives you the meaning of some of the details already
presented, which suggests that all of the other details also have a meaning.
Verse 20 doesn't give you the meaning of every detail, but the couple that it
gives you suggests that all the other details can also have their meaning. To
say that gold means charity, or that the waters are the flood of truth, it's not
just imagination. Verse 20 tells us that these details mean something, have a
spiritual meaning. Visions are full of physical detail. The physical detail
always means something.

## Questions and Answers

**Question:** Why is it that John sees him as an angel?
**Bishop Williamson:** It says in verse 13, "one like to the Son of Man," not
that it *was* the Son of Man. That's where I think it's an angel standing in for
our Lord. Literally, what John is really seeing is an angel in the place of
Christ. In the mystical sense, the risen Lord is no longer weighed down by the
flesh as he was during his 33-year human life.

**Question:** Regarding the expression "Like the Son of Man," is it similar to
its use in Daniel?
**Bishop Williamson:** Daniel 7:13, "And I saw one like the Son of Man came with
the clouds..." It obviously refers to the Messiah. I'd need to know Daniel very
well to be sure if that is the same. The commentator Dom Guéranger gives that
meaning to "like to the Son of Man" in verse 13 here, that it's an angel.

**Question:** Why wasn't he adored?
**Bishop Williamson:** He's not adoring him here. He simply falls down as if
dead. Maybe he is falling down in a swoon or a faint or horror rather than in
adoration. I don't know.

Any other questions on chapter one?

```
{
    "date": "06-10-1998"
}
```