Bishop Williamson deciphers the spiritual warnings in Revelation 18 against 
materialism, reflects on St. Thomas More's Utopia, and discusses the separation 
of talent from morality.

# Apocalypse 18: Materialism, and the Enigmatic Utopia

Bishop Williamson explains that Revelation Chapter 18 details the fall of 
"Babylon," symbolizing the destruction of worldly delights and materialism. 
He states that the "merchants" represent heretics and hypocrites seeking earthly 
glory, and their listed "goods" carry profound spiritual meanings, such as gold 
signifying divine wisdom and silver inspired eloquence. 

Bishop Williamson also discusses St. Thomas More, suggesting his "Utopia" was likely an intellectual exercise rather than a serious societal blueprint, and touches upon More's 
steadfast faith against Henry VIII. He emphasizes the inevitable judgment upon 
modern materialism, which has created an interlocked global economy blind to 
spiritual realities, and notes how "Babylon" is responsible for the blood of 
prophets and saints. 

Finally, he explores the distinction between artistic or 
political talent and the moral purpose it serves, asserting that great talent can 
unfortunately be used for ignoble ends.

## The Fall of Babylon: Lament of Kings and Merchants

Chapter 18, verse 9: "And the kings of the earth, who have committed 
fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall weep and lament over her, when 
they shall see the smoke of her burning. Standing afar off for fear of her 
torments, saying: Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! For in 
one hour is her judgment come." Now that Babylon is punished, they are standing 
far off from worldly delights. The worldlings lament the total destruction of 
everything for them except hell.

Verse 11, parallel to the kings of the earth, are the merchants; so that is pride 
of life and concupiscence of the eyes. "And the merchants of the earth shall weep 
and mourn over her." The merchants, in the literal sense, are those who are 
concupiscent, those who commit concupiscence of the eyes—worldlings, worldly 
people, businessmen. In the spiritual sense, the merchants are heretics and 
hypocrites who feign virtue to gain glory, not in heaven but on earth. They exhibit 
concupiscence of the eyes because they want worldly glory. So, in the literal 
sense, it is worldlings, and in the spiritual sense, it is heretics and 
hypocrites who pretend to be virtuous to get worldly glory, not heavenly glory.

## Spiritual Meaning of Merchants' Goods

Verses 12 and 13 list the goods of these merchants. In the spiritual sense, 
these represent what heretics and hypocrites feign or imitate to get worldly 
glory. "Merchandise of gold and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, and 
fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all 
manner of vessels of ivory, and all manner of vessels of precious stone, and of 
brass, and of iron, and of marble, and cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and 
frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and 
sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of men." All the works.

The gold, then, is divine wisdom. The silver is inspired eloquence; you talk 
about somebody having a silver tongue. Chrysostom actually means "golden mouth"—
*chrusos* is gold, *stoma* is mouth. Saint John Chrysostom, Saint John of the 
golden mouth, was so eloquent. Silver is inspired eloquence. The precious stone 
is Christ. Pearl is the kingdom of heaven, obviously from the parable where a man 
sold all he had to get the pearl of great price. Linen is purity, used in a 
strainer. Purple is the desire of martyrdom. Silk is virginity. Scarlet is 
charity, presumably by the color of fire, the fire of charity.

Thyine wood—I don't know what that is today—is one of those woods that doesn't 
rot, so thyine wood is perseverance, which does not rot. Ivory is chastity. 
Brass, or bronze in some translations, is endurance. Iron is patience, becoming 
supple under heat; iron becomes malleable when heated. Patience has a certain 
right kind of give when under trial.

## Digression: St. Thomas More and Utopia

I was just reading about St. Thomas More. Henry VIII threatened him with tortures—
the rack, rope, and others. St. Thomas More remarked, "Those are threats for 
sure." They never actually tortured him; they cut his head off. That's a man. 
Marble is toughness.

The latest Birch magazine has an article about Sir Thomas More, a review of a 
book on him. It's not a bad review, probably not a bad book. Interestingly, it 
discusses St. Thomas More's *Utopia*. *Utopia* is a strange book and often cast 
in St. Thomas More's teeth. How could he write such a humanistic thing? This 
review suggests it was an academic joke, an exercise in fanciful thinking 
designed to amuse his fellow scholars, but certainly not St. Thomas More's 
serious idea of how the world should be organized. That makes sense.

In other words, he was a very clever man, in the best sense. Usually, the word 
"clever" has bad connotations, but he was very clever, very honest, and devout. 
When he became Lord Chancellor, there was a big backlog of cases, and he dealt 
with them so rapidly that the backlog quickly disappeared. A very good lawyer, 
a very faithful Lord Chancellor, he rose to the top rank. But when Henry VIII 
married Anne Boleyn and "divorced" Catherine of Aragon, expecting everyone to 
agree, Thomas More did not. He didn't say a word about it, as you may know. He 
retired, hoping that if he lay low, nobody would come after him. Of course, Henry 
VIII had to come after him because everyone knew what he thought, even without 
his having said a word. More said, "You can't incriminate me with what I haven't 
said." Eventually, they cut his head off.

A point that raises a question mark for Thomas More is his friendship with 
Erasmus. Erasmus was a worldly character, a very worldly scholar, and had much 
to do with promoting the climate of opinion that encouraged Protestantism. So, 
Erasmus was rather doubtful company. But again, Erasmus was a very gifted man, 
and they must have been companion scholars. In any case, *Utopia* was a clever 
man's exercise of the imagination. That makes sense to me. Does anyone here know 
much about Thomas More? That he would write it off as a kind of hobby, like some 
famous man writing a detective novel or science fiction, makes sense. Only Thomas 
More was a Latin and Greek scholar, so it was an exercise in that vein.

*Utopia* means "nowhere." This same review in the Birch magazine—which has a 
picture of a Kosovo gunman on the front—has an interesting couple of pages by 
Father James Thornton on this book on Thomas More. He goes through other names in 
*Utopia*. For instance, Adimos, the capital city, means "no people" in Greek. 
There are several other names like that which indicate it's just a fanciful 
exercise. Some of the ideas might seem subversive, but St. Thomas More, in his 
personal life, was the very opposite of subversive. He was a loyal servant of the 
crown, except when the crown went against the Church. Then he was still a loyal 
servant by not going with the crown. That's real loyalty, just like Archbishop 
Lefebvre's loyalty. So, he was certainly no subversive. The funny ideas in 
*Utopia* are not what Thomas More lived by, practiced, or preached by his 
practice. So, when people ask about *Utopia*, that is surely the answer: it was 
an intellectual game.

## Resuming Spiritual Meanings and the Fall of Materialism

Marble is toughness. Cinnamon is sweet-scented penance. Odors are prayer; we've 
seen that before with incense. Ointment is the Holy Ghost. Frankincense is 
devotion. Wine is compunction. Now, why would wine be compunction? I can't see 
the connection. Oil is mercy. Flour and wheat represent doctrine, pure and 
plentiful. Beasts of burden signify devotion to others. Sheep is docility. Horses, 
in the spiritual sense—what all these worldlings imitate to get worldly glory—
stand for generosity. Chariots stand for carrying others. Slaves stand for the 
service of others, and souls of men.

Verse 14: "And the fruits of the desire of thy soul are departed from thee, and 
all fat and goodly things are perished from thee, and they shall find them no 
more at all." That is what will happen to all materialists today, either before 
or after they die. People today are completely sunk in materialism; it's all they 
believe in. This chapter very much applies to our world today. On the last day, 
all this trading for human glory is lost. In the literal sense, materialists 
will lose everything. In the spiritual sense, all this trading for human glory 
is wiped out.

"The merchants of these things, who were made rich, shall stand afar off from her 
for fear of her torments, weeping and mourning, and saying: Alas, alas! That great 
city, which was clothed with fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and was gilt 
with gold, and precious stones and pearls! For in one hour so great riches are 
come to nought. And every shipmaster, and all that sail into the lake, and 
mariners, and as many as work in the sea, stood afar off, and cried, seeing the 
place of her burning, saying: What city is like to this great city!"
In verses 15 and 16, in the literal or spiritual sense, all is instantly lost.

Someone in the audience suggests a reference to Proverbs 31:6 for wine as 
compunction: "Give wine to those that are grieved in heart." However, this is not 
quite compunction, more like "grieved in mind." Further research into 
commentaries is needed to understand why wine might refer to compunction.

In any case, with the collapse of Babylon, everything is instantly lost. It is 
going to be something like that with New York. I don't know how, where, or when.
Verse 17: "For in one hour are so great riches come to nought. And every 
shipmaster, and all that sail into the lake, and mariners, and as many as work in 
the sea, stood afar off." The shipmaster is literally the traveling merchant by 
sea. Spiritually, the shipmaster represents bad priests, prelates, and preachers 
who are meant to be fishers of men. "And cried, seeing the place of her burning, 
saying: What city is like to this great city?" The place of burning is hell. How 
could it happen to such a city?

Verse 19: "And they cast dust upon their heads, and cried, weeping and mourning, 
saying: Alas, alas! That great city, wherein all were made rich that had ships at 
sea by reason of her prices; for in one hour she is made desolate." They cast 
dust upon their heads; the ship merchants will do penance, but too late. The ship 
owners of verse 19 are the worldlings who staked everything on worldly wealth, 
like people today.

"Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath 
judged your judgment on her." John exhorts the saints to rejoice over the 
destruction of materialism, its comeuppance. "Heaven" here means saints, where 
God dwells in their hearts. The apostles are all those who labored for the 
Gospel, and the prophets are all those who announced the kingdom to come.

## The Final Judgment on Babylon

So we have had Babylon and its destruction. Now, the final judgment. Verse 21: 
"And a mighty angel took up a stone, as it were a great millstone, and cast it 
into the sea, saying: With such violence as this shall Babylon, that great city, 
be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all." The mighty angel is Jesus 
Christ. The millstone is the mass of the damned that our Lord casts effortlessly 
into hell. Like a stone thrown into water, it immediately disappears. Babylon 
will disappear, swallowed up in the flames of hell.

"And the voice of harpers, and of musicians, and of them that play on the pipe, 
and on the trumpet, shall no more be heard at all in thee. And no craftsman of 
any art whatsoever shall be found any more at all in thee. And the sound of the 
mill shall be heard no more at all in thee. And the light of the lamp shall shine 
no more at all in thee. And the voice of the bridegroom and the bride shall be 
heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; 
for all nations have been deceived by thy enchantments. And in her was found the 
blood of prophets and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth."

This is the condemnation of materialism. In hell, there is no music except 
shrieks and yells. There will be no art or craft, no milling, none of the normal 
operations or normalcies of life; all swallowed up in fire. There will be no 
light and no married life down below. Why no light, no married life, no joy? 
Because your merchants were the princes of the earth; commerce was king. And the 
enchantments of materialism infected all men.

Today, the economy of the entire world is so interlocked. This is an interesting 
point made on a recent tape: no nation can step out, even if it wants to, because 
of credits. You must join the system, the banking system, to buy and sell; 
otherwise, all trade stops. The whole thing is completely locked up in the hands 
of the merchants of the earth, centered in New York, the center of world 
commerce. There's a brave prime minister in Malaysia at the moment who has tried 
to denounce certain powers and stop them from wrecking his currency and country. 
He's standing up to them, but there's a strict limit to what one can do because 
they hold all the strings. One yank, and you're throttled, especially a little 
country.

It's tied up by our fault, by the fault of men. Men want the goodies, so they 
necessarily fall into the hands of the masters of goodies, the masters of money. 
If you're a victim of those people, it's most likely you've fallen for materialism 
yourself. The whole world today thinks only of economy, balance of payments, 
currencies, money, more goodies, more production, sales, etc. That's all the 
world seems to think about, and the most serious men take this seriously. The 
rest is considered insignificant. It's an incredible state of affairs, but that's 
exactly Chapter 18. There's going to come a moment when the whole thing will 
seize up, stop, get thrown into hell.

## The Blood of Prophets and Saints

Before questions, we have one more verse, verse 24: "And in her was found the 
blood of prophets and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth." 
Babylonians must answer for the blood of all prophets and saints unjustly killed. 
If we are in the fifth age, and if it ends with a chastisement, then all merchants 
and ship owners will be severely punished for what they've done to the Church. All 
materialists who deliberately pushed the Church aside and trampled it underfoot, 
with incalculable damage to souls, will answer for all of that.

Then, in the seventh age, under the Antichrist, materialism will presumably be 
back in the saddle. The whole world will have gone materialistic once more, and 
again, materialists will answer for the terrible persecution of the Church under 
the Antichrist. Perhaps something like the persecution going on now, if not 
actually that. I don't think we're at the Antichrist yet; he's a ways away, but 
not all that far. Either way, materialists will have to pay for their scorn of 
things spiritual, and for their scorn of prophets and saints, like Archbishop 
Lefebvre. Shortly before Archbishop Lefebvre died, LICRA (Ligue Internationale 
Contre le Racisme et l'Antisémitisme) was suing him for alleged racist remarks 
about Arabs. The Archbishop had ventured into politics, saying the quasi-invasion 
of France by Arabs was not good for France and that Arabs are not assimilable in 
France. It was carefully said, but it was too much for LICRA. They were going to 
drag him before the courts. Had he not died, they would have done their darndest. 
That's Babylon destroying prophets and saints. They didn't quite get his blood, 
but they would have if they could have. It's a wicked world we live in.

## Questions and Discussion

Any questions on Chapter 18? A splendid chapter for our own times.

**Audience Member (Fox):** Are you referring to Chapter 17, concerning the 
Protestant interpretation of the Scarlet Woman and the city of Babylon as Rome?

**Bishop Williamson:** Yes, Protestants above all use the comparison with Rome 
from Chapter 17, I believe. They may also use Babylon in Chapter 18, but 
primarily the Scarlet Woman because Chapter 17, verse 9, mentions her sitting on 
seven hills: "The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth." 
And Rome has seven hills: the Capitoline, Aquiline, Equiline, Palatine, Aventine, 
and two others like the Caelian and Viminal. Together, we could probably name 
them. On her forehead was "Babylon the Great, Mother of Fornications," so the two 
are connected.

**Audience Member (Schmidt):** A couple of things. In verse 13, what is the 
meaning of frankincense? And concerning the harp players mentioned, would that be 
a flip side reference to penance, like an unappreciative penance?

**Bishop Williamson:** Frankincense means devotion. As for the harp players, yes, 
maybe. Harp playing can be beautiful spiritual music, music of penance. But in 
hell, there is no such music, only noise, horror, shrieks, and yells. So it might 
be that the absence of harpers signifies the absence of that beautiful music 
struck from penance.

## Transition to Revelation 19: The Victory of Christ

Chapter 19 deals with the victory of Christ. We are in the sixth of the seven 
great sections of the Apocalypse: 1. The Seven Churches, 2. The Seven Seals, 3. 
The Seven Trumpets, 4. The Dragon, the Woman, the two Beasts, and the Lamb, 5. 
The Seven Cups, 6. Final Divine Justice. This sixth section includes: first, the 
destruction of materialism (Chapter 18); second, the victory of Christ over the 
Antichrist (Chapter 19); and third (Chapter 20), the victory over the devil—the 
damnation of the damned, the Antichrist, and the devil. Chapters 18, 19, and 20 
detail the comeuppance of the damned (materialists), the Antichrist, and the 
devil. Chapter 21 is the seventh and last vision: the City of God, the happy 
ending after six days of struggle.

So, Chapter 19: "After these things I heard as it were the voice of much people 
in heaven saying: Alleluia! Salvation, and glory, and power is to our God. For 
true and just are his judgments, who hath judged the great harlot which corrupted 
the earth with her fornication and hath revenged the blood of his servants, at 
her hands. And again they said: Alleluia! And her smoke ascendeth for ever and 
ever. And the four and twenty ancients and the four living creatures fell down and 
adored God that sitteth upon the throne, saying: Amen; Alleluia!"

Always this vision of the throne of God. "Alleluia" is an untranslatable word of 
rejoicing. Salvation comes from God alone, therefore glory is due to God alone. 
All salvation is His (comes from Him), all glory is His (goes to Him). The 
judgment of God upon the prostitute was doubly just: she corrupted the earth and 
slaughtered the saints. "Avenge, O Lord, Thy slaughtered saints whose bones lie 
scattered on the Alpine mountains cold." Does anybody know that quote? It's 
Milton. The only trouble is he's referring to Protestant saints.

## Talent and Moral Purpose

Milton is bad news, a horrible Puritan, but a great poet and user of the English 
language. How can a great poet be a completely messed up heretic? 
Someone asks how Rousseau could have a beautiful French style. Father Scarry 
apparently commented on the beauty of Rousseau's French. Luther is the founder of 
modern German; his language is magnificent. The King James Bible, the authorized 
version, is in Shakespearean English. Dr. White told priests that in the King 
James Version, Psalm 47 is possibly translated by Shakespeare—the 47th word is 
"shake" and the 47th word from the end is "spear," or something like that. 
Shakespeare may well have worked on translating the King James Bible. The language 
was splendid because it was a very vigorous period of England, the Elizabethan 
age. The book is heretical, yet the language is magnificent. Same with Luther, 
Rousseau, and Milton. How can this be?

Someone suggests that whatever is good in the art is from previous Catholicism; 
that's basically true. But also, talent and the use you make of it are two 
different things. Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas say this regarding *ars* or 
art. One can be a marvelous craftsman and make it serve horrible purposes. Picasso 
is a classic example: very talented, a visual genius who could take visual 
elements to say what he wanted with striking originality, but he used it for 
trash. An astonishing talent serving trash purposes.

Conversely, you can have poor talent serving a very fine purpose: a very moral 
artist who just lacks talent. Talent and the purpose for which you use it are 
different. Great artists have both talent and a noble purpose, but they don't 
always coincide. The amount of talent in each age is probably approximately the 
same; God distributes talents similarly across ages. But what those with talent 
choose to use them for is up to men's free will. You must distinguish between the 
craft and the moral or immoral purpose of the craftsman. It's an obvious 
distinction if you think about it.

Same with a politician. Clinton has enormous talents as a politician. If he chose 
to use those talents for good... could he? They are so welded to the purposes for 
which he does use them. He certainly has enormous talent, but the purpose for 
which he's using it is miserable. The two are strictly separable.

What's an example of someone very moral who didn't have much talent? An example 
might be a composer of the Mass who wrote for the Church with all honesty and 
desire to do something for God, but the music just hasn't got the same zing as 
their pagan music. It's perfectly possible they're just not as inspired when they 
want to do something good.

```
{
    "date": "04-03-1999"
}
```