Bishop Williamson on navigating the mysteries of the Apocalypse, prioritizing spiritual 
insight over detached academic deconstruction.

# Deciphering Apocalypse: Symbolism, Scholarship, and Spiritual Truth

Bishop Williamson outlines his approach to studying the Book of Apocalypse, emphasizing 
its inherent mystery and symbolic language. He states that the Apocalypse is not a 
literal timetable but offers symbols with broad, multiple applications, which is 
crucial for spiritual understanding. Bishop Williamson criticizes overly academic, 
"dusty" scriptural analysis that, in his view, strips the sacred text of its power 
to nourish souls. 

He recommends Dom Molio's commentary for its focus on the symbolic 
level and explains his intention to provide priests with a solid, practical 
understanding of scripture for pastoral work rather than scholasticism.

## Course Overview and the Catholic Epistles

This year, the last of a five-year cycle—the last of four years 
of the New Testament: Matthew, John, St. Paul, and basically the Apocalypse, mostly 
the Apocalypse. I would like to go into the Catholic Epistles, as they are called. 
We had a look at Acts of the Apostles, together with St. Paul, but the seven 
letters: three of John, two of Peter, one of Jude, and one of James—the seven 
epistles. There is a lot in them. They are not too difficult, although St. Peter is 
quite dense. Peter's Epistles are quite dense. There is obviously a lot in the first 
epistle of St. John. There is not much apparent shape in them. When I say apparent, 
that is because the Lord God is not bound to write in (Latin); there is a divine 
substance there with no human order, per se.

## Introducing the Book of Apocalypse

But the bulk of the year will be the Book of the Apocalypse, which is very 
difficult. It is not easy. Let me give you firstly a perfectly ordinary, but 
thoroughly, and I think, pretty reliable introduction, which comes from Renan's 
manual. So it is a manual introduction, which I have not even compared with other 
manuals in order to cull what I think is the best; I am just giving you more or 
less Renan.

### The Mysterious Nature of the Apocalypse

The Apocalypse obviously deals in mystery. This next part is not Renan, so it may 
not be anything worth copying down. It deals in mystery. It deals a great deal in 
the future; it is the future of the Church. It was written on Patmos about 100 AD by 
Saint John. That is what tradition says and is undoubtedly true. About 100 AD, it is 
the last book of the Bible, or the last to be written. It is a great deal about the 
future, the future of the Church.

### The Danger of Exact Future Knowledge

But it does not do us good to know the exact future. For instance, if we knew 
exactly the day we were going to die, it would be a severe temptation to live with 
the world and enjoy the world until the day before, and then suddenly make a 
monumental act of contrition and trust to… I do not know if you made it really, but 
you would make it so that God would have difficulty. God is not mocked, but I would 
really reckon I could mock God if I were to fool around until the day before, and 
then I would rely on making a good act of contrition. Whether God would give me grace 
to make that good act of contrition is exactly what is in question. And that is why 
God does not tell me the day I am going to die, because it is not at all sure that 
if I tried to fool Him like that, I might not succeed.

Voltaire, after a horrible life of fighting the Church, fell very, very seriously 
ill and made an act of contrition, I think. I think he was reconciled with the 
Church, and then he got well again, so he began cranking up all his villainy again. 
Then he fell seriously ill the second time, and that time, he could not get to an 
act of contrition because he was in a state of jubilation—it was just rage and 
self-destructive despair the second time, I think. He tried to fool God. Obviously, 
God saw his heart, and if the act of repentance the first time had been sincere, God 
might well have allowed him to die. God is the master. God is the master.

So God does not give us a timetable for the future, and when He tells the story of 
the Church, He is not going to tell it so that you can read it like a railway 
timetable or an airplane timetable, because that would not be good for us. That is 
why the whole thing is wrapped up in mystery.

### Symbolic Language and Multiple Applications

These are symbols: the dragon, the woman, the lamb, the elders. It is wrapped up in 
symbols, which are of uncertain application. You do not know exactly what applies 
when and where. And the interesting thing is that many of the symbols are of general 
application; they can apply to more than one situation.

#### The Abomination of Desolation as an Example

For instance, the abomination of desolation—that is a phrase originally in Daniel, I 
believe. The abomination of desolation applies to Antiochus Epiphanes, where I think 
it may be spoken of the first time in Daniel. Daniel is the most apocalyptic of the 
Old Testament books, the most futuristic, with one of the most prophecies of the 
future, and probably the most quotations in the Book of the Apocalypse. The 
Abomination of Desolation applies to Antiochus Epiphanes, which is about 156 BC. It 
applies to 70 AD, the destruction of Jerusalem. You certainly can apply the 
Abomination of Desolation to what is present on the altar—a false sacrifice, the 
destruction of the sacrifice on the altar. And it certainly applies again to the end 
of the world. So there is an example of one of those prophecies which has more than 
one application. And even if you hit upon one application which definitely applies, 
it does not exclude others.

#### Wagner's Ring as a Pagan Comparison

I will give you a pagan comparison which is absolutely not in the same class: 
Wagner's Ring of the Nibelung. The words were composed in 1849, and the music was 
composed from 1854 through to about 1876. It is a massive piece, four operas, and 
Wagner wrote the words himself, and then he wrote the music himself. It is a massive 
piece, and it is kind of the history of the world. It is a presentation of the very 
beginnings of the world. Some of you may remember, we watched it a few years ago. 
It is an interesting piece. It is absolutely not necessary to salvation that you 
should know anything about Wagner's Ring, but it is interesting. It is a great 
vision. It is a false vision, but there is a lot of truth in it. What is false is not 
true; what is true is not false. You must not say, "It's all trash," and you must not 
say, "It's all wonderful," because it is neither all trash nor all wonderful. It is a 
mixture.

In any case, it is cast in the form of a myth. Wagner, to say what he wanted to say 
with the generality and depth that he wanted to say it, went back to myth, and he 
revived the German myths. He went in amongst the myth books, and the myth books are 
not like Scripture. It is not clear, and there is not a definite canon with no 
contradiction. You and I know there cannot be contradiction in one part of the Bible 
with another. If it looks like contradiction, there is something we do not know. But 
there is no real contradiction because there is not a word of falsehood in Scripture. 
There cannot be. However, a number of the myths tell the same story in a different 
way, and they contradict one another. It is a mess in a way, absolutely speaking. 
Yet there is a whole lot of truth about human nature and even about history wrapped 
up in these myths. And anyone who goes and rewrites the myths can pick and choose 
how he likes, and he can reconstruct how he likes. A famous collection of German 
fairy tales is, of course, the Brothers Grimm. Jacob Grimm and, I forget the other, 
Wilhelm, I think. Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm. Very fine. They were German scholars about 
the 1840s, and they just collected all of these fairy tales and made a compendium.

The Ring is a huge story from the beginning of the world to the end of the world, 
from the depths of the Rhine when Alberich steals the Rhine gold down to the 
crashing of Valhalla in ruins. It is from the construction of Valhalla to the 
destruction of Valhalla. It is a tremendous vision. But since it is a myth, then it 
is symbolic. For instance, Wotan is the father god. There is a recent production in 
Bayreuth, about 10 or 15 years ago, which we have got upstairs on tape, which shows 
the father god as a 19th-century capitalist, as a money baron. It is good. You get a 
real flash of recognition. You can see many features of Wotan in the capitalist 
robber baron, the prince of industry in the last century. There is a lot of 
comparison, and you can get a real kick out of watching Wotan being portrayed as a 
19th-century robber baron. But the robber baron is absolutely not the beginning and 
end of Wotan, so to speak. Wagner has succeeded—he was just a pagan, and there was 
not much Catholic in him, although it was Catholics who best understood him at the 
end of his days. It was Catholics who received him in Catholic Bayreuth; it was 
Catholics who built his theater; it was the Catholic king who patronized him. But 
Catholics best understood him, it is probably fair to say, but he was not Catholic. 
He definitely was not Catholic, but he did have a grip on human nature.

His symbols are of general application. Wotan is much more than just a robber baron, 
but if you see the robber baron, there are many features of Wotan in him. In other 
words, Wagner has got the universal truths pegged in such a way that they can apply 
to a whole lot of different situations in different times. That is the advantage of 
myth: its generalness. And that is a pagan comparison for the breadth and 
applicability of symbols in the Apocalypse.

## Interpreting the Apocalypse: Avoiding Narrowness

I have just got most of the way through a very interesting book by that Argentinean 
priest, Castellani, Father Castellani, who died, I think, in the 1970s. He was a 
Jesuit. He was banned and crushed and smashed by the Jesuits. A very smart man 
because he saw what was coming in the Church. He was one of those priests who could 
see, and that is why they crushed him so. He has written a book about the Apocalypse, 
and he takes an individual line here and there. He says, "This is what this prophecy 
is about." Well yes, but that is not what it is exclusively about.

The temptation with people who write about the Apocalypse is to think, if we say, 
"Well, the five kings are those five emperors of Rome, the seven heads are these 
seven nations of this time..." Well yes, but then they may well be seven nations of 
some other time. It is only when the world comes to an end that we are going to be 
able to look back and see what each symbol most applied to. But I think even at the 
end of the world, we will only say to ourselves, "This is what the symbol most 
applied to." But that did not exclude it also applying here and there and there. So, 
the Apocalypse is a book fertile in interpretations. It would confuse me if I did 
read too many. I am not that kind of brain. So I have not seen what they have all 
written about it, but every time I seem to come across a commentary, they seem to 
zero in on this particular application, as though nobody has ever seen this 
application before. And all of the applications probably have some truth in them. 
And yet, that is not what it is about, so to speak. It is much more than that. It is 
less than that, and it is more than that. So, get used to being mystified before you 
start.

## Recommended Commentaries and Approaches

### Dom Molio's Symbolic Approach

The best commentary I know, which is the one I am going to give you, is by a French 
Benedictine monk called Dom Molio. He is very good. He took up the Bible and 
commented. Dom Molio. I do not think he has translated anything into English. You 
will not be able to get him, I do not think. I once met him in Paris, way back in 
the 1970s. I think he died in the late 1970s. I once visited him in his cell in Paris 
with another seminarian at the time. A very, very humble man. Very unassuming. Very, 
very good.

### Critiquing "Dusty" Scripture Scholarship

His kind of Scripture commentary is despised today. It is not considered really 
Scripture commentary at all because he does not go into all of the dusty details. He 
refuses to go into the dusty details, although he is learned. He has read all of the 
saints and all of the fathers and all of the classics. He has read them. But he will 
not do that modern stuff of, "mustard seeds are two millimeters when they grow, and 
then when the mustard tree grows to two kilometers, and that really is that 
million-ish expansion which is what Saint Matthew had in mind." You have heard me on 
that kind of subject before. You may or may not agree with me.

You may have the misfortune to meet some of these "dust characters," and they are a 
damn nuisance because they do know their dusty stuff, and they are dogs in a manger. 
They destroy people living off Scripture. They stop people living off Scripture. They 
turn the Bible into a kind of dusty chamber where you have to put on a gas mask in 
order to survive because you are just dealing in dust all the time. You are kicking 
up dust all the time. And it is unlivable, and it is very little use for spiritual 
life, for the intellectual life, or any other kind of life. A very clever trick of 
the devil to divert the Scripture commentary into this kind of useless, in my 
opinion, useless stuff. But they are arrogant. They are proud of what they do. They 
really think that that is what Scripture commentary is about, and they shut out 
everybody else, they despise everybody else, kick them out, and then stop anybody 
else nourishing themselves with Scripture. They do not nourish themselves, and they 
stop anybody else nourishing themselves. They are dogs in a manger. And they do not 
think so. They think that they are the bee's knees and the cat's whiskers. They are 
miserable characters and producers of misery, but in the Modernist church, they hold 
sway. And that is one reason why the Modernist church went Modernist: because people 
were cut off, Catholics were cut off, or as good as cut off, from Scripture.

### The True Purpose of Scripture Study

You may meet some of these characters. They will probably know much more about 
Scripture than you do. They will wheel out all of these arguments, and if you try to 
get into an argument, you certainly will not have learned from me the answers to all 
of their arguments. No way. The courses I give on Scripture, it is basic, I hope. 
Sufficient to make you know Scripture some and love Scripture much, I hope. I hope 
it is enough for that. That is really the purpose of the exercise: that you should 
have some knowledge of the sacred text and some love of it so that you will go back 
on your own and so that you will be able to nourish yourselves on it. That is the 
purpose. I have no pretensions to scholarship at all. So, if you run into these 
scholars, they will shoot you down at the drop of a hat. If they realize, especially 
if they realize that you are actually feeding off Scripture, they will do their best 
to stop it. It is instinctive. And you will not have the answers. Walk away is my 
suggestion. Do not bother to get into it with them because what they are doing is 
murdering by dust. Do not bother with them.

But, by all means, I really hope that you—God does not want you to be scholars today 
either. He surely does not want you to be intellectually… He wants you to be priests. 
Priests able to look after souls and sustain souls, keep souls going in this 
incredible drama that is nearly at the end of the world, and the collapse of the 
Church, and so on. That is what He wants. And my humble hope would be that what I 
give you, at least maybe would help you to do that.

### Other Commentators (Castellani, Allo)

For instance, there is a somewhat famous commentary of the Apocalypse by a Swiss 
Dominican around the turn of the century called Père Allo. I think he was Swiss. And 
Castellani is scornful of him. I think Castellani is basically right. I really do. 
Allo is a dust merchant. It is all impeccable, it is all scholarly, there are 
footnotes, and so you cannot breathe any longer in all of this kind of thing. Ugh. I 
would not bother. I do not think I would bother even to read Allo. But if somebody 
said, "Your scripture teacher has not even read Allo, and you are pretending to teach 
the Apocalypse?" No.

Various scholars, every now and again a scholar, especially in philosophy, asks to 
come and teach at the seminary, and I usually reply to him, "Dear Professor, thank 
you so much for your noble offer to come to the aid of us mental delinquents, of us 
mentally challenged dinosaurs, dinosaur cubs at the seminary. I am afraid we are 
really far too mentally challenged to be worthy of your talents. With much regret, I 
have to say that I really do not think this is the place for you to deploy all your 
abilities and learning." That is what I say, because these scholars, they do not have 
the same angle on it as the Church, even if they are Catholic scholars. Out there, 
everything tends to get relativized, especially history, and even in philosophy, it 
is rather more the history of philosophy. They are not coming at it as, "There is a 
truth. There is one truth. There is a truth in every single philosophical question 
that can be raised. There is a truth. It is a science. Our business is simply with 
that truth, and all the rest, we just got to learn it." That is not their attitude. 
They live off these quarrels between scholars, and disputes, and arguments, and 
counterarguments. It is a different perspective. So I just usually say, "We are far 
too stupid for you to come and teach here," and so usually they back off at that 
point because they do not want to come and teach people who are particularly stupid. 
That is fine. That is just fine if they back off. But it is a different angle.

## The Seminary's Goal: Priests for Souls

Remember, the purpose of the society is to produce priests, and the jewels of the 
society are its seminaries. But what is a seminary? A seminary cannot be an end in 
itself. A seminary is to train priests. Yes, but what is a priest for? If a seminary 
is for priests, fine, but what is a priest for today? It is very clear from the 
Archbishop's example, as well as what he put into practice—his own personal theology, 
but also what he put into practice in the seminary: he wanted to make priests that 
would look after souls, with good doctrine and with pastoral zeal, with a solid 
doctrine. It did not have to be very learned or very complicated; it had to be 
solid. A solid doctrine with a concern for souls, to get out there and look after 
souls.

So, you need to know as much scripture as will strengthen your own piety and 
doctrine. It should give you a doctrine that will fit with your piety, a solid 
doctrine and a solid piety, neither of them sentimental, and that will get out on 
the road and will hold the road. You can go out on the road, and even if there are 
pits and holes and potholes in the road, and you crash and bump, the thing is not 
going to fall to pieces. That is the size of it. It is a fairly limited, and 
practical, and down-to-earth ambition, but I think it is an ambition which 
corresponds to the situation we are in today. The devil is very, very clever. He has 
got 1,000 ways of sidelining servants of God and sidelining the salvation of souls, 
distracting, diverting, and stopping the salvation of souls. He is terrible.

## Planned Structure for Studying the Apocalypse (Introduction from Emmanuel)

So, I will give you this introduction from Emmanuel, which will cover the usual basic 
questions about where a book is from, where it is going, what it contains, and so on. 
And then we will go into Dom Molio. The advantage of Dom Molio is that he kind of 
stays at the symbolic level. He does not say, "This applies to this, this applies to 
this, this applies to this." He rather gives you the cross-relations with the rest of 
scripture and the cross-relations between various parts of the Book of the Apocalypse 
itself, I think, and he is liable to stay somewhat at the level of symbol. So, if you 
want an application, you are going to be disappointed if you read Dom Molio. On the 
other hand, if you want to understand the symbolic language at the level of symbol, 
then he is very good. So, you will see. I think he is the best. Castellani has some 
fascinating insights. I may throw in a bit of Castellani here and there, but he is 
not broad enough, and he does not pretend to be anything other than kind of 
brilliant. There are brilliances, but the eccentric does not cover the basics, 
whereas Dom Molio is steady and covers the whole ground.

Introduction:

1.  The title of the book and its literary genus (G-E-N-U-S), which means the 
    kind of literature: fairy tale, black comedy, social comment, novel, lyrical 
    poem, epic poem. These are genera—the broad kind of literature that the 
    Apocalypse is.
2.  Unity and sources. Remember, John was just an adolescent bishop when he began. 
    He really did not know all that much. Now, the scholars go over every single 
    word 33 times. What is scholarship, do you know?
3.  Canonicity and authenticity: the fact that it belongs to the canon of the Bible 
    and who really wrote it. Who was the author? Authenticity.
4.  Date and place of composition. That is rather more straightforward.
5.  This is frankly, it is all a bit relativizing, but: addressees and purpose. And 
    Saint John's purpose is one thing, but Saint John's purpose is peanuts 
    compared with God's purpose. This is God's word, not just John's word. To 
    concentrate too much on who he was writing to or why he was writing to them, if 
    you concentrate too much on that, you forget God's purpose in this. So, five: 
    addressees—the people that the letter was addressed to—and the purpose of the 
    letter.
6.  The text. That is a very easy one.
7.  Theological teaching. That is interesting. Theological teaching: God, Christ, 
    Holy Ghost, angels, church, last times. There is a lot of theological teaching. 
    It is the word of God. The Book of the Apocalypse does teach a good deal of 
    theology.
8.  Systems of interpretation. That is really what I have been talking about. And he 
    has got six. Reminds me of Hamlet: mythological, contemporary historical, 
    eschatological, historical ecclesiastical, historical eschatological. Does 
    anybody remember the piece of Hamlet, whereabouts in Hamlet? Do you remember? 
    In Hamlet, the chief player says, "We can do historical, historical comical, 
    tragical comical, tragical comical historical." This is a bit like that. And 
    that is the last section. So they are down to eight points.

Let me get it right. Number one: title and literary genus.

## Deeper Dive into Literary Genus

### 1. Title and Literary Genus
Now, there is a kind of literature we are talking about. Is the Apocalypse meant to 
be comedy? Is it meant to be tragedy? What genus does it fit in? Is it an epistle? Is 
it epistolary?

Title: Apocalypse comes from the Greek word *apokalyptō*, meaning to discover. 
*Kalyptō* is to conceal, and *apokalyptō* is to unconceal or to discover. The 
Apocalypse is a kind of discovery or a revelation. In the New Testament, it is 
translated by *Revelatio*: the revealing, the discovering, the uncovering. 

Apocalypse means uncovering. In the New Testament, it means a revelation. In other 
words, a manifestation of Christ as Lord and judge.

Under title, you might add a three-word summary of the Book of the Apocalypse. Did I 
give you that the other day? Yes, I did. "Jesus gonna win." If you remember it, you 
do not need to put it down.

Two, literary genus. Do all of you know how to spell literary? L-I-T-E-R-A-R-Y. 
Genus. Jesus gonna win. That is what this book reveals. It is a revelation that Jesus 
is going to win, which is a mighty consolation to poor Catholics who keep on losing. 
Anyone could think Catholics were losers, but the Apocalypse says we are winners. So 
okay, we do need to be told.

### Characteristics of Jewish Apocalypses

Jewish apocalypses used pseudonyms (that is false names, assumed names), esoterism 
(that is special symbols that are only known to a few; esoteric means something that 
the crowd does not know, but only a few select people know), and symbolism to write 
about the last times. There were many apocalypses from between 300 BC and 200 AD; 
there was much of this kind of writing. There were many others besides John writing 
an apocalypse. These Jewish apocalypses followed on the Old Testament prophets. They 
followed on the heels of the Old Testament prophets, notably Isaiah, Ezekiel, Joel, 
and especially Zechariah and Daniel.

Why do you think there were many apocalypses from 300 BC to 200 AD? I can guess. When 
Our Lord came, the Jews were actually expecting the Messiah. They were expecting him. 
So within those 500 years, they may have expected him some time beforehand, and then 
some time after, because the prophecy in Daniel is not exactly clear. 49 weeks? Who 
knows that each day is seven years, so that makes 49 times... etcetera. These things 
are not clear. And God had reasons for not making it clear. Why did God not make it 
so clear that nobody could make any mistake about the Messiah? For less merit if you 
pick it up, and less demerit if you turn it down. That is how God works. I have 
quoted you that famous quotation from Pascal: "There is always enough light to 
enlighten people of goodwill, and enough darkness to throw off people of bad will." 
That is in all His works.

If anybody looked humanly at the Society, there is easily enough reason to think it 
is just a bunch of klutzes. On the other hand, if you have got goodwill and any sense 
of the truth at all, you can see that this is where the truth lives, even if they are 
klutzes. There is darkness and light. Père Barbara was like that, and yet he was 
extremely human. He had defects. But for anybody who looked twice and thought twice, 
he was a man of God. And yet here were all of these human defects to put off anybody 
who was ready to be put off. So, that is the way God works. Souls discerned correctly 
with an upright heart. When John the Baptist said, "This is the Lamb of God," it was 
clear enough to them. And yet the high priests and scribes, they were not of 
goodwill. They were not of upright hearts, and so there was plenty of darkness, 
enough to throw them off. "He's just a carpenter. Comes from Galilee. Come on." All 
of that kind of thing. So, it was not clear exactly when the Messiah would arrive. 
But it was about the time, and the Jews were expecting it. So that is my guess why 
there could be apocalyptic writings spread over 500 years. I may easily be wrong.

### Difference Between Prophets and Apocalyptic Writers

The differences: A prophet addressed contemporaries as a preacher, using the future 
to influence the present. The apocalyptic writer speaks of the last times.
With the prophet, the inspired word is more frequent than the vision. You read any of 
the prophets—Isaiah, Daniel, Ezekiel. Even in Daniel, the prophecies of the future 
are less than half the complete book, although in Daniel the proportion is probably 
highest of prophecy, of telling what is coming in the future. In the prophets, the 
inspired word is more frequent than vision of the future. And his visions are drawn 
from reality. Ezekiel's loincloth, growing rotten—that is the people of Israel, 
wrapped around the Lord God and gone corrupt. The pot, the prostitute—examples are 
drawn from reality. The visions are drawn from reality. In the apocalyptic writers, 
the vision is the rule, and the symbols are unreal.

In the prophetic writers, visions of the future are the exception. You get these 
little minor prophets; you usually have two or three chapters. At least two will be 
describing the misbehavior, and then at the very most, one will be a hope of the 
future, the Messiah. More like it is two and a half against a half. The Old Testament 
prophets, when they castigate what is going on, in order to give people a fillip at 
the end, to give them a hope, they then add a vision of the future, which is: the 
Messiah will come, and he will straighten us out, and he will be good, and so on. But 
the real emphasis is on what is being done naughtily in the present. In the 
apocalyptics, it is all the future. The visions are the rule, and the symbols are 
unreal: the dragon, the woman in the desert going off into the desert and giving 
birth to a child. It is not really real. And then the river springing up and trying 
to swallow the child. Okay. It is symbolic.

The prophets are nationalists or nationalistic. The apocalyptics are universalists. 
Of course, the Old Testament prophets are universal, really. It is the word of God. 
It means all men of all times and all places, but still, the accent in the prophet 
himself is Judah and Jewish people. That is as the prophet himself sees it. But the 
apocalyptics are expressly universalists.

### St. John's Apocalypse Transcends the Genre

St. John shares certain features with these apocalyptic writers, but he rises far 
above them. He is the word of God. None of the others were as he is, so he is 
inspired, isn't he? He rises far above them. They are fabricating; he is inspired.
Again, the consideration of the genus—oh man, that is marvelous scripture 
scholarship, because it is the German way of some bad German scripture scholars who 
said, "Well, if there's a resurrection at the end of the Gospel, this is because the 
Gospels are all telling a story, and every story, by the nature of things, has to 
have a happy ending. So of course, the Gospels had to have a resurrection at the end 
of the Passion." That is the way in which it belongs to the *genre*. Every time you 
quote a foreign word, it impresses the university, it impresses the ordinary, poor, 
dumb something, because, of course, the dumb somethings do not know a foreign 
language, so they are impressed when you sort of throw around these foreign words. 
"He's gotta be a scholar. He's gotta be deep 'cause he knows a foreign language. I 
can't learn a foreign language, so he's gotta be smarter than I am." So, you call it 
a *genre*, and then everybody gets impressed because it is a French word. It is just 
the genus, the Latin word; it is the same word in French and Latin. So this business 
of classifying something by what kind of literature it is, that pegs it. And, of 
course, the Gospels are a story, therefore they are bound to have a happy ending. See 
how you relativize and undermine? Really.

However, there is some interest in what it says there about the literary genus. There 
is some interest. But, of course, Saint John rises far above it. He is inspired. But 
these characters are lost. They have got lost in human study. They do not have the 
faith. That is the real problem. They do not have the faith.

## Unity and Sources of the Apocalypse (Brief Mention)

Two, unity and sources. So this is all a bit dusty, but there is some interesting 
information. But never forget, this book is inspired. It is the word of God. That is 
the most important thing to know about it. Mysterious though it is, it is the word of 
God.

One, unity. Two, sources, obviously. Sub one, unity. Sub two, sources.

The unity… Who on Earth would think of questioning whether the book is written by one 
author? Nobody ever dreamed of asking that question until modern times. Nobody dreamed 
of asking it. But they cut Isaiah in two just like the Jews did. There is Chapters 
1 to 39 and then Chapters 40 to 66. Only they go better than the Jews. The Jews only 
cut Isaiah with a wooden sword in two pieces, but the modern critics cut Isaiah into 
now three or four or five pieces. There is the Proto-Isaiah, and then there is the 
Deutero-Isaiah. That is all Greek. Then there is the Trito-Isaiah, and 
then there is the… Ugh. Ugh. I do not know why we should not go straight to... I do 
not know. We will see. But there is some interesting information in those four 
Gospels.

```
{
    "date": "21-09-1998"
}
```